At the outset, I congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly at its current session and wish you every success in presiding over its work.
The current session of the General Assembly is taking place at a delicate historic time. The international arena is witnessing intertwined crises of immense complexity, requiring concerted action to invigorate multilateralism, including, first and foremost, the United Nations system. As the world still suffers from the colossal consequences of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, successive geopolitical crises have raised international tensions to unprecedented levels. In the light of those delicate circumstances, Egypt would like to reflect on the current international landscape, the challenges faced by our world today and the means to confront them.
First, the United Nations system still faces the challenge of acting outside its working context. That undermines its capacity to take an effective international stance that supports the maintenance of international security and stability and promotes the development and prosperity of peoples of the world. It is unfortunate that our hopes have been dashed in terms of achieving, in the twenty-first century, a world of stability and renouncing tensions while establishing international systems based on respect for international law. Instead, we are surprised by a growing tendency towards polarization and confrontation rather than achieving complementarity to realize our common interests, or even to compete on the basis of justice leading to human advancement.
The United Nations system is further threatened by the use of double standards in dealing with similar crises even when acting outside its working context. What is an acceptable response for one crisis is considered rejected for another. Therefore, the flaws we are witnessing are not a feature of the United Nations system itself, but they reflect the will of certain members in the system.
As we meet in September of every year in this international forum, I call on all those gathered here to respect the United Nations system, with a view to reinvigorating and reforming it. That process should not remain incomplete. Instead, it should be addressed
seriously, objectively and fairly so that the United Nations can better respond to the challenges we face and become more flexible in meeting the demands and needs of our peoples. In that regard, Egypt reiterates its adherence to the African common position calling for reform of the Security Council, based on the Ezulwini Consensus and Sirte Declaration.
The Russian-Ukrainian crisis has further exacerbated the global economic crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic’s negative impact, coupled with successive geopolitical developments, has increased the burdens on the developing countries, especially pertaining to the sovereign debt crisis and soaring budget deficits. Developed countries therefore need to respond by launching a global initiative between creditor and debtor nations, to transform the bulk of debt into joint investment projects. That would create more job opportunities and contribute to economic growth.
The current international situation clearly indicates that the concept of international security is now closer to a system of balance of power than one of collective security. The international environment has been characterized by conflicts, not cooperation. We must therefore work to promote the spirit of international consensus to ensure the security of all States, without threatening or undermining each other’s security and safety. The current global challenges have threatened the very notion of the nation-State, interfering in its internal affairs and disrespecting the unique features of its society. They weaken the State entity and, at times, even disrupt it, which enables non-State actors such as terrorist groups and armed militias to control the fate and wealth of peoples. The nation-State and its institutions must be empowered to play their role at all levels to preserve and promote international peace and security.
There are many complex and intertwined challenges on the international scene with multiple repercussions, most notably the food security crisis, which is the result of the international community’s failure, over many years, to achieve Sustainable Development Goals, particularly the Goal seeking to eradicate hunger and achieve food security. In addition, the crisis has been exacerbated by the recent economic and geopolitical crises. Regrettably, in Africa alone, one in five people are at risk of hunger and the continent remains a net food importer, at an annual cost of $43 billion. We reiterate the need to confront the global food crisis by establishing an integrated strategy that addresses its root causes through developing sustainable farming and agricultural systems and meeting the urgent needs of food-importing developing countries. We also must ensure that their products have unimpeded access to the global supply chain, particularly through the development and transfer of agricultural technology. We also stress the importance of supporting early warning systems regarding food insecurity and promoting grain storage and exports. In that context, thanks to its unique geographical location, Egypt declares its readiness to cooperate with the international community to establish an international centre for storing, supplying and trading grains in Egypt, which will contribute to maintaining global food security.
The current session of the General Assembly is taking place under a theme that reflects our deep understanding of the crises and challenges the world is facing today. There is no doubt that the search for radical solutions to those interlocking crises is most applicable to the climate change crisis.
Egypt, in its capacity as President of the upcoming twenty-seventh session of the Conference of States Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP 27), appeals sincerely to all members of the international community to translate our pledges and commitments into action and to support developing and least developed countries in their efforts to confront the devastating impacts of climate change. They are the most deserving and in need of such support on the basis of the principles of equity and common yet differentiated responsibilities.
During COP 27, which Egypt will host in a few weeks’ time, we look forward to reaching outcomes that contribute to accelerating the pace of implementation at all levels, consolidating the international community’s commitment to addressing climate change, including through emissions reduction, enhancing adaptation and tackling losses and damage due to climate change and, most important, raising climate financing ambitions. We must also commit to double adaptation financing and ensure $100 billion annually, as well as working towards a just transition to renewable energy.
The international community’s ability to move forward on implementing the goals of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, especially limiting the rise in global temperature, is closely linked to the achievement of tangible outcomes in Sharm El-Sheikh conference. That will demonstrate to our peoples that confronting climate change remains a top priority at the global level, among all other challenges that confront today’s world. In that context, Egypt reaffirms its steadfast commitment to providing all favourable conditions to that end.
Water security remains one of the most important challenges facing our world today, especially in the Middle East and the African continent, where some countries are located in the driest and most arid areas in the world. Unfortunately, that grave human suffering is not always due to a lack of resources or declining rainfall, but often to non-compliance with international law and to certain upstream countries monopolizing water resources and depriving downstream countries of the water that flows for the common good of all peoples.
Those who believe that resorting to peaceful means to settle water disputes is a form of weakness are mistaken. Such an approach is rooted in the strength and ability to protect and preserve the rights from loss or alienation. It is also based on a keen awareness by Governments of the negative impacts of conflict on people. In that context, after a decade of self-restraint, Egypt still recognizes the right of the Ethiopian people to development. However, that cannot be at the expense of the Egyptian people’s right to life and survival, which has been linked to the Nile River since the dawn of time. I reiterate the need to reach, without delay, a legally binding agreement regarding the filling and operation of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, in accordance with the Agreement on Declaration of Principles concluded by Egypt, the Sudan and Ethiopia in March 2015 in Khartoum and the presidential statement issued by the Security Council on 15 September 2021 (S/PRST/2021/18). As three sovereign States, they must respect what they agreed upon and implement their agreement through deeds, not just words, in order to maintain international peace and security. Egypt therefore calls on the international community, represented by the United Nations and the Security Council, as well as influential States at the international level, to implement international law in order to safeguard the rights and lives of 250 million Egyptian, Sudanese and Ethiopian citizens.
Reaching definitive solutions to the crises in our region remains an essential pillar of building a secure and stable international system. At the forefront of that is the need to reach a just, lasting and comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question, through negotiations on the basis of resolutions of international legitimacy and the two-State solution, in order to establish a Palestinian State along the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Meanwhile, it is essential to refrain from any unilateral measures that would change the facts on the ground and undermine prospects for an ultimate solution.
Based on Egypt’s responsibility to support its brothers, we continue to support efforts to reach political solutions, in accordance with international terms of reference, in Syria, Lebanon, Yemen and the Sudan in a manner that preserves the unity, integrity and sovereignty of those brotherly countries and puts an end to any external interference in their affairs.
Egypt continues to support the efforts of our brothers in Libya to establish the constitutional framework to allow for the simultaneous holding of presidential and parliamentary elections as soon as possible and ending the transitional period. In that regard, Egypt commends the role of the elected Libyan Parliament and stresses the importance of the withdrawal of all foreign forces and mercenaries from Libya, as well as the dismantling of armed militias within a specific time frame, in order to restore long-desired stability in Libya.
Our region has suffered for a long time, and it is high time to overcome the suffering, to prioritize peoples’ interests over personal ones that seek power and wealth and to end attempts to undermine our region’s unity and national security.
Before concluding, I would like to note in particular the importance of solidarity as a fundamental value of which we are in dire need, now more than ever before. The designation by the United Nations of 20 December as the annual International Human Solidarity Day reflects the importance of initiatives to eradicate poverty and celebrate unity in the context of diversity. It is also an indication that the United Nations believes in solidarity as an indispensable value, not only to effectively achieve the Sustainable Development Goals but also to counter emerging challenges and address economic gaps.
Solidarity remains a source of hope for a better tomorrow. That tomorrow cannot be achieved unless we all act together, hand in hand, to build and to banish all evil for peoples who seek coexistence and cooperation under the banner of human fraternity.