Allow me to begin by conveying to the President the warm greetings of the Prime Minister of the Republic of Haiti, His Excellency Mr. Ariel Henry, who had to cancel his participation in the general debate at the last minute because of the sociopolitical situation in the country. I therefore have the honour to read out the address that he was to have made from this rostrum.
“I would like to congratulate His Excellency Mr. Csaba Korosi, President of the General Assembly at its seventy-seventh ordinary session. I hope that, under his wise leadership, this year’s work will be a complete success. I would also like to commend the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, for his dynamic leadership of the world Organization and his renewed
commitment to the cause of Haiti despite the many challenging problems and other conflicts that affect the world.
“I have the honour today to address this Assembly in the specific context of major challenges that our States repeatedly face, which we must constantly address and find appropriate solutions for the good of humankind. The United Nations, whose mission is to preserve the ideals of international peace and security, is the proper forum in the context of multilateral diplomacy to deal with and overcome those challenges, in accordance with the principles of international law and the values enshrined in its Charter, while respecting the right to self-determination of peoples.
“Global peace and security are at risk. I call on the parties to all the conflicts that are causing disruption and suffering to the citizens of the world to stop the fighting and find negotiated solutions to their differences. There are too many victims, too much destruction, too many consequences for other countries and too much collateral damage. It is imperative to return to respecting the common rules of international law and living together.
“The sharp rise in the cost of basic foodstuffs on the international market is weakening the economies of many countries, especially developing countries, and is pushing hundreds of millions of human beings around the world into instability and food insecurity. The temptation is great for each country to try to monopolize the available resources to provide for its population. We saw the results of such behaviour in the control over vaccines during the coronavirus disease pandemic. In these difficult times, the rule must be solidarity among peoples.
“My country, like many others in the Caribbean, the Indian Ocean and elsewhere, remains highly vulnerable to climate hazards, rising sea levels and increasingly violent and frequent natural disasters. The passage of a single cyclone can wipe out the efforts of decades of hard work and investment. My country has unfortunately experienced devastating earthquakes and cyclones. That is a concern for the countries of the subregion. Within the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), we are looking at this issue.
“It is imperative, indeed urgent, for the international community to demonstrate imagination, selflessness and altruism to commit our planet and our respective countries to a new kind of international relationship. We are all interdependent and the problems of one can quickly have immediate consequences for others. For example, conflicts between two countries or too much poverty in others lead to major migratory movements that can destabilize several neighbouring countries, or even more distant ones.
“In that respect, the theme of the seventy- seventh session of the General Assembly, “A watershed moment: transformative solutions to interlocking challenges”, takes on its full meaning in the case of my country. This is an opportunity for me to talk, from the rostrum at the United Nations, about the challenges facing Haiti in the context of an institutional crisis and to speak about my Government’s efforts and responses to address and overcome them.
“I am speaking at a time when my country is going through a multidimensional crisis, whose consequences threaten democracy and the very foundations of the rule of law. It is a sociopolitical crisis, compounded by insecurity, which further exacerbates the country’s situation and undermines the State apparatus. It remains a matter of great concern for my Government and for the international community.
“Haiti is at a crossroads — an extremely difficult, but decisive crossroads for its future. My Government is faced with a rather complex equation that needs to be solved, and that requires the effective support of our partners. My Government’s priorities are to restore security and public order without delay; reach a broader consensus around a political agreement among as many sectors as possible in the short term in order to achieve peaceful governance; create a climate conducive to the holding of general elections as soon as possible, with a view to returning power to elected representatives freely chosen by the Haitian people in order to restore democratic institutions; and address economic and social issues in order to improve the material living conditions of the vast majority of the population.
“On the question of security and the restoration of public order, I will not be telling anyone anything new by saying that the activities of armed gangs create a dangerous environment that is ruining the daily lives of the Haitian population. That is an unacceptable situation, which has reached worrisome dimensions. Clashes among rival gangs have resulted in a high number of victims among the population, forcing them to flee their homes to escape the terror of the bandits.
“In my capacity as Head of the Superior Council of the Haitian National Police, given the complexity of the situation, I took measures to render the police more effective and better prepared to deal with the insecurity. I proceeded, within our means, to strengthen the operational capacities of the police institution and improve the working conditions of police officers. The strengthening of police operations led to some good results, reducing violence by armed gangs, particularly in the metropolitan area. However, much remains to be done to combat and eradicate that scourge.
“That was acknowledged in the Secretary- General’s most recent report (S/2022/481) on the activities of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH). The report notes that the efforts of the Haitian National Police led to the arrest of several individuals suspected of being involved in kidnappings and murders. The report also recognizes the limitations of the National Police and the lack of capacity and expertise of BINUH, in its current composition, in terms of the number of experts and degree of specialization, to deal with the unprecedented level of crime in the country.
“I want to reaffirm here my determination to put out of action those who want to perpetuate the chaos and prevent the normalization of the situation. My Government, at great sacrifice, made available the necessary resources to provide the National Police with adequate means to effectively carry out its duties. The delivery of armoured vehicles and equipment that it lacks is delayed. I truly regret that the orders placed to better equip the National Police are so late in being delivered. The National Police is capable of doing its job, but it needs strong support from our partners and appropriate training on the ground with the help of partners from the international community in order to put an end to such a situation.
“I would like to take this opportunity to welcome Security Council resolution 2645 (2022), which prohibits the transfer of small arms and light weapons and their ammunition to non-State actors and prevents their trafficking and use for illicit purposes.
“In addition, several Member States have pledged bilateral support to the Haitian National Police, including financial assistance. To that end, a basket fund was set up to assist the National Police in combating gang violence. I commend the Governments that already contributed to that fund, and we encourage other partners to do so. We need their continued solidarity now more than ever. I would like to take this opportunity to express my gratitude to our key international partners that made commitments at the various high-level meetings on security in Haiti. I thank them openly on behalf of the Haitian people and Government.
“The circumstances of my accession to the leadership of my country required that I immediately engage in a dialogue with all sectors of Haitian society in order to build sufficient consensus around a political agreement for peaceful and effective governance during the interim period. I am convinced that frank, sincere and inclusive dialogue remains the best formula for achieving a lasting solution to the current crisis.
“Despite the political differences that persist among the political actors, I continue to encourage dialogue. Initiatives involving various segments of society are under way. I hope to see all those efforts succeed in the near future. They primarily concern the restoration of fully operational democratic institutions through free, transparent and inclusive elections, as well as an agreement on a collective approach to constitutional reform.
“With regard to the political dialogue already under way, Haiti is seeking international support to make the process more credible and build confidence among the actors concerned. In that context, I fully support the efforts of the CARICOM and the International Organization of la Francophonie to provide their expertise and engage with us to resolve the crisis, with the discreet yet effective support of the United Nations. The Organization, which has long and extensive experience on the ground in Haiti, must continue to support the political and electoral process, taking into account the realities on the ground and the need to give priority to national solutions.
“I have heard the public’s calls. I have listened to the demands of my compatriots protesting the high cost of living. It is a constitutional right to protest and make demands in a peaceful manner. However, I strongly condemn the looting and vandalism, as well as the attacks on churches, schools, universities, hospitals, politicians, economic actors, diplomatic missions and international organizations. I also condemn those who ordered, organized and financed it all. Sooner or later, they will have to answer for their crimes — before history and justice.
“The actors in Haiti need to understand that politics must be done differently. That is why I remain available and open to continuing the dialogue with all stakeholders in the country, so that together we can open the path to reconciliation in order to repair the torn social fabric and find a lasting solution to a crisis that is pulling the country towards the abyss. Good governance goes hand in hand with the fight against corruption, smuggling and trafficking of all kinds. My Government has taken steps in that direction. Our budgetary discipline and sound management of public revenues recently led to the establishment of a staff-monitored programme in my country with the help of the International Monetary Fund.
“My Government’s major reform of its customs service is beginning to bear fruit and show results. It has enabled us to enhance monitoring and carry out seizures of weapons, ammunition, counterfeit currency and drugs. In the process, we have seen customs revenues double in record time. Not everyone was happy with that strategy, and we have good reason to believe that the unrest and attempts at destabilization represent the retaliation of fraudsters, whose activity has been reduced considerably.
“The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime—a United Nations programme—has provided us with experts to assist in customs administration throughout the reform. The Office needs more resources in order to be more effective, as well as to contribute to the modernization of our customs system and ensure the sustainability of the reforms under way.
“With regard to justice and human rights, my Government assumed office in a delicate political context, following the heinous and tragic assassination of President Moise on 7 July 2021. Justice must be done to him, his family and the Haitian people. I would like to acknowledge the words of President Gustavo Petro Urrego of Colombia who, not long after his address to the General Assembly from this very rostrum (see A/77/PV.4), apologized to the Haitian people for the involvement of Colombian mercenaries in the murder of President Moise. That is a transnational crime involving the nationals of several countries. Investigating it is difficult and complex. I want to thank all the countries involved for their cooperation.
“Many other crimes and massacres have to date gone unpunished, and murderers are still at large, some of whom have had the audacity to place themselves, weapons in hand, at the head of demonstrations over the past few days. I am also aware of cases of human rights violations against peaceful Haitian citizens, a direct consequence of the climate of insecurity that prevails in the country. Respect for human dignity is the foundation of the fundamental rights of every individual. I am determined to respect, and ensure respect for, international and regional commitments aimed at preserving human rights.
“In that regard, working to end prolonged pretrial detentions, which is a situation to which many detainees awaiting trial are subjected, remains a priority. The fact that it occurs reflects the weakness of our judicial system, which must be reformed. In that regard, I commend the efforts of civil society actors and the personnel of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti, which continue to promote and contribute to the improved administration of justice in the country.
“Contrary to what some of my opponents have said, I have no desire to stay in power for longer than necessary. My Government’s main focus is to re-establish constitutional order and return the leadership of the country to elected officials who are freely chosen by the Haitian people through free, transparent and inclusive elections. I continue to encourage dialogue aimed at reaching a political agreement on the holding of free presidential, legislative and local elections as soon as the minimum conditions are established.
“It is essential that the elections be held in a climate of security and social calm. That is an essential condition for ensuring the broadest possible participation of people of a voting age, which is the only way to guarantee the legitimacy of newly elected officials and ensure political stability. I have begun discussions with the various stakeholders on the establishment of the body responsible for organizing the elections, and those discussions should be concluded shortly. That body must be able to quickly prepare a timetable for political actors on both the constitutional referendum and the holding of elections. We would greatly appreciate the technical support and expertise of our usual partners in that process, while of course respecting the freedom and sovereignty of Haitians.
“With regard to economic and social issues, I often say that poverty, precariousness and the lack of future prospects for our young people, inter alia, are the root causes of the repeated crises my country is experiencing. It is important that, even in the short time in which my Government has been called upon to assume such responsibilities, we address economic and social issues in order to improve Haitians’ material conditions of existence. A sustainable solution to the phenomenon of insecurity also requires long-term socioeconomic development. There is a direct relationship between the level of crime and the situation of extreme poverty.
“We must also give hope to our young people by creating stable and decent job opportunities so as to offer them alternatives to plan and build their futures without being forced to risk illegal and clandestine travel. Safe and legal migration can be beneficial to countries’ economic development, as stated in the Declaration on Migration and Protection, to which 20 Governments of the region, including Haiti, subscribed on 10 June at the ninth Summit of the Americas.
“In addition to the sociopolitical crisis and the phenomenon of insecurity, natural disasters are a major handicap to Haiti’s development. The most recent earthquake on 14 August 2021 dealt another blow to the national economy. The economy’s poor performance for three consecutive years exposed the country to a serious humanitarian crisis.
“There are 4.9 million people, or 46 per cent of the population, in need of humanitarian assistance this year. With the support of our partners, the Government has been able to assist over 450,000 people in three earthquake-affected areas. Damage and losses caused by the earthquake have been estimated at more than 11 per cent of the country’s gross domestic product. We hope that the promises made by our partners at the international donors’ conference held under the auspices of the United Nations and the Haitian Government in Port-au- Prince in February will be fulfilled.
“Insecurity, political instability and natural disasters have contributed greatly to the poor performance of the country’s economy, which has experienced negative growth for three consecutive years. This non-exhaustive summary of the situation explains the deterioration of the living conditions of the majority of the population, whose social and economic rights are constantly being violated. The Haitian population, especially the vast majority who live in precarious conditions, has the right to a decent life.
“It is true that humanitarian aid has never contributed to a country’s development. We must create the conditions to attract investment. It is the responsibility of my Government to work to improve the situation — we are well aware of that fact, and we are working on it.
“Haiti is at a crossroads, a decisive moment in its history. We are working on transformative solutions to the challenges we face. From this rostrum, I wish to join President Biden, who has a solid understanding of the Haitian crisis, in making a solemn appeal to the international community to stand with Haiti and the Haitian people. I also wish to thank all those Heads of State and Government of our great family of nations who have expressed their concern about the situation in my country and have offered Haiti their support. Much remains to be done to emerge from the crisis and move towards the social and economic progress to which the Haitian people aspire.”