Many leaders have spoken here over the past few days. We share the same concerns. The current state of our world is very worrying. The pandemic persists and the global economy remains sluggish. War among nations is no longer a mere possibility but has become a reality. The violation of international law has become a norm in pursuit of narrow self-interest. Crisis after crisis is unfolding around the world, including climate change, rising inflation food and energy shortages.
History teaches us that these phenomena might lead to a huge war. Let us look at the period leading up to the Second World War. The Great Depression, the rise of ultranationalism competition over resources and rivalry between major Powers — these are very similar to what we are facing today.
Clearly, we have been handling these challenges the wrong way. We have been divided instead of united. We have been working individually instead of collectively. We have been focusing on words instead of deeds. The question now is: What are we going to do about it? Are we going to continue along the same path or are we going to choose a different path? If we continue on the same path, we will be heading towards a disaster, but if we choose a different path, we might stand a chance.
So, today I would like to offer a world order based on a new paradigm — a paradigm of win-win, not of zero sum; a paradigm of engagement, not of containment; a paradigm of collaboration, not of competition. This is the transformative solution that we need. Allow me to share why we need this new paradigm.
First, we must reignite the spirit of peace. A deficit of trust breeds hatred and fear and may lead to conflict. We have witnessed these phenomena in many parts of the world. We must turn the trust deficit into strategic trust, and that starts with upholding respect for international law The fundamental principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity are non-negotiable. I repeat — the fundamental principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity are non-negotiable. Those principles must always be upheld.
Meanwhile, the peaceful solution is the only option for settling any conflict. A habit of dialogue and cooperation would nurture strategic trust. These are the rules of the game that we must maintain if we truly want peace. It is our responsibility to apply them consistently, not selectively or only when we see fit. My President conveyed these messages of peace in his visits to Kyiv and Moscow in June.
We must also apply this new paradigm to make a breakthrough in Palestine and Afghanistan. For far too long, the people of Palestine have suffered and longed for peace. Until Palestine can truly become an independent State, Indonesia will stand firm in solidarity with our Palestinian brothers and sisters. The people of Afghanistan also deserve a peaceful and prosperous life where the rights of all, including women, are equally respected and where women’s and girls’ access to education is granted. Without that new paradigm, peace will remain an elusive dream.
Secondly, we must revive our responsibility for global recovery. We are concerned that global solidarity is fading away, whereas injustice and selfishness abound, the weak stand small and the mighty take all. We are seeing the symptoms every day. Trade discrimination is running rampant. The monopoly in the global supply chain persists. Global economic governance is used to justify the rules of the strong.
The pandemic teaches us the valuable lesson that no one is safe until everyone is. That lesson shapes the priorities of Indonesia’s presidency of the Group of 20 (G-20). The whole world is pinning its hope on G-20 as a catalyst of global economic recovery, especially for developing countries. The G-20 must not fail We cannot let global recovery fall to the mercy of geopolitics. We must act urgently to address food and energy crises and prevent a fertilizer crisis from happening. Otherwise, billions more people will be at risk particularly in developing countries.
We also need a new paradigm as we move beyond the recovery. A new paradigm would instil a collective responsibility to attain the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and fight climate change. Without that new paradigm, there will not be a strong recovery for all and many of us will be left behind.
Thirdly, we must bolster regional partnership. In many places, the post-war regional architecture was built as a tool for containment and alienation. That phenomenon continues today with mini-lateral groupings. Many become part of a proxy war between major Powers. That is not what regional architecture should be. It must serve as the building block for peace and stability, rather than undermine them.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) was built exactly for this purpose. We refuse to be a pawn in a new Cold War. Instead, we actively promote the paradigm of collaboration with all countries.
That paradigm will also guide Indonesia’s chairmanship of ASEAN next year. It is the commitment of Indonesia to forge ASEAN’s centrality in shaping regional order in the Indo-Pacific, to reinforce ASEAN’s unity as a locomotive for peace, stability, and prosperity in the region, and to ensure that ASEAN matters to our peoples, to the region and to the world.
ASEAN will also continue to address seriously the situation in Myanmar. Indonesia is deeply concerned by the military junta’s lack of commitment to implementing the five-point consensus. ASEAN must move forward and not be taken hostage by the situation in Myanmar. The support of the international community, in particular the neighbouring countries of Myanmar, is very important to restoring democracy in Myanmar.
On the Pacific, Indonesia will continue to strengthen our cooperation with the Pacific countries. We will work together to address our shared challenges, including on climate change. As a Pacific nation ourself, we want to see the Pacific as an integral part of a peaceful, stable and prosperous Indo-Pacific.
The new paradigm of collaboration must be the spirit of the United Nations. Inclusive and meaningful engagement must trump the take-it-or-leave-it approach, and the voices of all countries big and small, developed and developing, matter equally. That is the very foundation of multilateralism. That is why we need a strong and reformed United Nations. It is why we need a renewed multilateralism that is fit for purpose and fit for its time. That is why we need a multilateralism that delivers. I repeat — we need a multilateralism that delivers.
I believe that by working together and adopting a new paradigm, we can create a better world for all. It is no longer the time to talk the talk; ow is the time to walk the talk.