I wish to congratulate the brotherly nation of Hungary on the election of its representative, Mr. Csaba Korosi, as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session. I wish you every success in this important international position, Mr. President, and the Kyrgyz Republic stands ready to support you. At the same time, I wish to thank Mr. Abdulla Shahid, the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session, for his hard work during difficult times for the world community, as well as for supporting the international initiatives of my country.
The United Nations was established 77 years ago after the worst world war in the history of humankind. Perhaps the founding States of the United Nations, which signed the international agreement to establish the Organization in San Francisco in 1945, naively believed that wars, destruction, hunger and suffering would end forever. I do not think so. Success can always be achieved if there is a mutual understanding that disputes and disagreements must be resolved in a spirit of good faith and compromise.
In the history of the United Nations, there have been many important victories and successes. Although conflicts occur with varying degrees of severity in different regions of the world, the United Nations has played an important unifying role as a moral authority in maintaining peace and security and providing for people’s wants and needs.
Now, with an unprecedented complication in the global geopolitical environment that has created alarming expectations in the international community due to the threat of the destruction of the fundamental foundations of peaceful coexistence and the inevitability of a major war, it is important for all of us to remember the high goals and objectives set down in the Charter of the United Nations, namely, to maintain international peace and security. To that end, we must take effective collective measures for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace, and for the suppression of acts of aggression or other breaches of the peace; bring about by peaceful means, and in conformity with the principles of justice and international law, the adjustment or settlement of international disputes or situations that might lead to a breach of the peace; and develop friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of the equal rights and self- determination of peoples.
Ever since our country became a State, we have consistently and strictly followed the United Nations Charter and have been fulfilling our duties in good faith. This March marked exactly 30 years since our country joined the United Nations, and recently, on 31 August, we celebrated the thirty-first anniversary of the independence of the Kyrgyz Republic.
We always strive to resolve our international disputes by peaceful means. In international relations, we always refrain from the threat or use of force against
the territorial integrity or political independence of any State. Looking back at the thorny path walked by our country, we highly appreciate the multifaceted contribution of the United Nations to the formation of Kyrgyzstan as an independent and sovereign State, and an equal and responsible member of the international community. Our people will never forget the support and assistance of the United Nations family in the formation of political, public and civil institutions, the strengthening of democracy and the development of a market economy. On behalf of our generous people and on my own behalf, I express my gratitude to all the leaders and staff of the United Nations system, who sincerely and selflessly helped us to realize the centuries-old dream of the Kyrgyz people to create their own independent State. To them, we extend our gratitude.
I take this opportunity to present to the international community from this rostrum the latest developments at the southern borders of our country, in relation to the aggravation of the situation at the Kyrgyz-Tajik border.
First, let me briefly touch on the history. The collapse of the Soviet Union in December 1991 paved the way for territorial disputes and border problems, some of which have not been regulated to this day. While there were more than 20 disputed areas along the entire perimeter of the Soviet-Chinese border, five of them were in Kyrgyzstan.
I want to proudly remind the international community that we have successfully finalized border- regulation issues, first with the People’s Republic of China in 1996 and jointly with the Republic of Kazakhstan at the point of intersection of the State borders of the three countries in 1999, and subsequently with the Republic of Kazakhstan in 2017. We have now practically completed our joint work and are about to sign an agreement on the State border with the Republic of Uzbekistan. I am pleased to note that the State borders with these three neighbouring countries have become borders of peace, good-neighbourliness, friendship and mutually beneficial cooperation.
With regard to relations with the Republic of Tajikistan, I would like to note the following. Our two close, neighbouring peoples have been living side by side for a long time. We are united by common values, culture, traditions and customs. We share the same faith. Our peoples are connected by family ties.
Our legendary father Manas was married to the Tajik princess Kanykey.
I also recall that, legally, the collapse of the Soviet Union occurred on 21 December 1991 in the city of Alma-Ata, Republic of Kazakhstan, when the heads of 11 newly independent States adopted the Alma-Ata Declaration on the creation of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). The declaration stated that our independent States recognize and respect each other’s territorial integrity and the inviolability of existing borders. They indicate that the strengthening of relations of friendship, good-neighbourliness and mutually beneficial cooperation, which have deep historical roots, meets the fundamental interests of the people and serves the cause of peace and security. It is written that the countries recognize their responsibility to maintain civil peace and international harmony. That legal document was signed by all 11 Presidents of the CIS member States, including the Republic of Tajikistan.
The aforementioned principle was confirmed by the President of Tajikistan, Mr. Emomali Rahmon, in the declaration on respect for sovereignty, territorial integrity and immunity of borders of the State Parties of the Commonwealth of Independent States, dated 15 April 1994. He signed and agreed. It is a pity that he is deviating from that principle now. He made his first official visit to the Kyrgyz Republic in 1998 after the end of the bloody civil war in Tajikistan. Later, two bilateral inter-State agreements were concluded between the Kyrgyz Republic and the Republic of Tajikistan: the Agreement on bases of the inter-State relations between the Kyrgyz Republic and Republic of Tajikistan of 12 July 1996 and the Agreement on Good Neighbourly and Partnership Relations of 26 May 2004. I want to note that both agreements were signed in Dushanbe.
From the very beginning of work on the settlement of border issues between our two States, the Kyrgyz side has always acted in full compliance with its international obligations, including bilateral ones, and conducted negotiations in a constructive manner, offering mutually beneficial compromises. I note that in April 2021, the armed forces of Tajikistan launched an unjustified and unprovoked large-scale aggression on our territory, killing 36 citizens and causing serious material damage. Although my decision to meet with the President of the Republic of Tajikistan in Dushanbe was heavily criticized by the Kyrgyz people —who
demanded that we meet at a neutral location — I flew to Dushanbe and met with President Rahmon in June 2021 to try and find mutually beneficial solutions to the border issues. For the sake of my people, I am ready to spend not only 10 hours on negotiations, as I did that day, but as much time as possible to resolve this issue once and for all.
Of course, whatever the solution is, it should be mutually beneficial. It is all the more painful for me to report that on 14, 15 and 16 September, large-scale military clashes took place in the south of Kyrgyzstan. Despite all previously negotiated agreements, the Tajik side, with ill intention, attacked border and civilian objects along the entire perimeter of the Kyrgyz-Tajik State border. About 140,000 of our civilians have been evacuated from border settlements. They are now being provided with the necessary assistance. In that regard, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the United Nations system, our friends and partners for their solidarity and support. Great material damage was caused to civilian and military facilities, including houses, administrative buildings, schools and frontier posts.
Any material damage can be restored. However, we cannot restore the lives of our citizens who were fired upon or those of the brave defenders who sacrificed their lives and died fighting for their homeland. We will never forget the bravery of our courageous soldiers.
We are deeply saddened by the unjustified armed aggressions by Tajikistan, despite international agreements and obligations established between our countries. Pacta sunt servanda is the Latin for “agreements must be kept”. We are ready to continue the negotiation process in a civilized and legal manner, in any format, with our Tajik neighbours. Considering that our trust has been weakened by the recent lawless actions of our neighbour, we are ready to continue negotiations and welcome the mediation efforts of international organizations, including the United Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, and the Collective Security Treaty Organization.
We have documented evidence of both yesterday’s and last year’s illegal and ill-intentioned actions of the Tajik side. We are never the first to start and never will be. We always try to avoid using weapons, and even more so, we never shoot at unarmed civilians. We are always forced to respond accordingly and adequately to the aggression of the Tajik side. In that regard, I emphasize that the Kyrgyz side does not claim foreign lands and does not intend to cede a centimetre of its land to anyone. We are convinced that all border and internal issues should be resolved at the negotiation table, and we are willing and ready in this regard. The most important issue today is the adoption of urgent measures to ensure security and stability in the border areas, to stop any actions aimed at increasing tensions among the local population, and to strengthen the trust between our two States. We are always ready for negotiations and clarification of our borders.
Regarding general United Nations issues, I would like to note the following.
This year, with half of the implementation period of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) having passed, we can now objectively look at the real situation at hand. The adoption of the SDGs in 2015, under the motto “leave no one behind”, was a bright example of the constructive negotiation capacity of the world community in the interests of all of us and subsequent generations. Meanwhile, it has already become obvious that owing to objective circumstances, including the coronavirus pandemic, the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals in developing countries, including our own, has slowed. Without adequate international funding, many may not even achieve the critical indicators of the SDGs.
I wish to reiterate the firm commitment of the Kyrgyz Republic to the SDGs and to their gradual implementation, taking into account our national capacities. I believe that our country’s own potential should be the main source and engine of sustainable development. For those purposes, our efforts are aimed at achieving the accelerated and qualitative growth of the economy, including through mutually beneficial regional and international trade and investment cooperation. For example, Kyrgyzstan actively participates in integration and cooperation processes, including the Eurasian Economic Union and the One Belt, One Road initiative of the People’s Republic of China.
The country is actively developing the locomotive of the “green economy”. With respect to the hydropower industry, small and medium-sized hydropower plants are being put into operation. Our esteemed neighbours Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan will participate in the construction of the largest hydroelectric power station — Kambarata — which will strengthen the energy security and optimize the use of water resources in the region.
In general, I want to note the spirit of unity, mutual understanding, trust and support that was demonstrated in the city of Cholpon-Ata two months ago, when the fourth consultative meeting of the Heads of State of Central Asia was held under the chairmanship of Kyrgyzstan. I hope that the signing by all parties of the Cholpon-Ata Treaty of Friendship, Good- Neighbourliness and Cooperation for the Development of Central Asia in the Twenty-First Century will open a new page in our inter-State relations. We are committed to continuing work in that format.
In conclusion, I want to assure the Assembly that Kyrgyzstan fully supports the United Nations as the only universal structure authorized by all of the States Members of the United Nations to meet the challenges faced by humankind. I hope that the United Nations will continue to properly perform all its functions and assist Member States in overcoming challenges and solving urgent global problems. I urge all Member States to provide unconditional political support and solidarity to the Organization in this difficult international time.