I would like to begin by extending my sincere congratulations to His Excellency Mr. Csaba Korosi on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session. I wish him a successful presidency of this session. I have the honour to speak on behalf of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in the Assembly.
We are at a critical juncture as the international community is facing multifaceted challenges, ranging from armed conflicts to environmental crises and an economic downturn that have set back global development. Multilateralism, which is always at the heart of international cooperation, has been undermined while unilateralism has been applied widely. These challenges, already exacerbated by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, have hindered and reversed the development gains attained during past decades. The implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) has never before been so tarnished. It is disheartening that the most vulnerable peoples and countries are now suffering the most. Countries in special situations — namely, the least developed countries (LDCs), the landlocked developing countries (LLDCs) and the small island developing States (SIDS) — which have endured the most difficult period coping with COVID-19 impacts, are additionally confronting climate, food and energy crises. It is more urgent than ever before for the international community to find solutions, not only transformative, but also more practical, effective, action-oriented, sustainable and tailored to the most pressing needs, so as to ensure that the most vulnerable are not left behind.
Seventy-seven years after our United Nations was formed, we should no longer be here in the Assembly Hall to stake any claim, lecture, blame or shame one another. Our world needs greater attention, concerted efforts and common desire. We, as stipulated in the Charter, are the peoples of the United Nations. We shall gather here to find the most appropriate solutions and take the most urgent actions to address the problems we are all facing today. This cannot be done without firmly upholding the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and preserving multilateralism. Our United Nations was founded to prevent another catastrophic world war. Our shared wisdom and political will to find the most pragmatic and suitable solutions to the multiple crises threatening us all today must prevail over other, individual interests. In doing so, we must strengthen our solidarity, cooperation and collaboration and must not create confrontation and division. As such, it is necessary, after more than seven decades, that United Nations reform revitalize and increase its ability to effectively address global problems.
In this context, the United Nations needs to effectively fulfil its mandate in maintaining international peace and security, as well as in promoting development cooperation. It is our common desire that the United Nations be transformed in order to respond to the current global landscape and needs in our joint effort to overcome the unfolding challenges that threaten international peace and development. The international community must find peaceful and lasting resolutions to any conflict and disputes around the world, including the Middle East problem. We believe that unilateral sanction or measures cannot be effective, as they not only contravene the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law, but also hamper the national development of other countries. Sanctions, regardless of their form, will end up compromising not only one’s own interests, but those of others and inflicting suffering on everyone.
We must also promote peaceful solutions based on our mutual interests and build an environment conducive to development so as to safeguard lasting peace and prosperity for all. In that regard, my delegation once again joins the overwhelming global call for the lifting of the economic embargo on Cuba and putting an end to all unilateral coercive measures, which have negatively impacted innocent people.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has enjoyed long-lasting peace, security and stability, which have served as favourable conditions for the national socioeconomic development of all member States. We in ASEAN continue to promote regionalism and multilateralism that emphasize the importance of centrality, unity, inclusivity, mutual
benefit and respect, which are a solid foundation for all essential ASEAN cooperation frameworks. Under the ASEAN framework, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic has actively participated and very responsibly contributed to the promotion of peace and stability. On that note, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic considers the role played by ASEAN as crucial for creating an environment conducive to a return to normalcy in Myanmar, and we should continue to engage Myanmar so as to ensure the continuation of the delivery of humanitarian assistance to its people and to explore ways and means to ensure Myanmar’s full and effective implementation of the five-point consensus towards tangible outcomes.
Since the inception of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in 2015, the Lao Government has presented two voluntary national reviews, in 2018 and 2021, reflecting the progress made and challenges encountered in the implementation of SDGs through its national socioeconomic development plans, Vision 2030 and the National Green Growth Strategy.
Nevertheless, throughout the past three years, the COVID-19 pandemic has had a direct impact on the socioeconomic development of every country, especially the least developed countries, including the Lao People’s Democratic Republic. The progress made prior to COVID-19 in the implementation of our national development and international commitments, like the SDGs and others, has therefore been severely undermined, affecting peoples’ livelihoods at all levels.
In addition, we are also facing extreme weather events in various parts of the world due to climate change. Like many other countries, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic remains vulnerable to external shocks and has been severely affected by natural disasters, especially extensive flooding. Over the past years, our Government has attached great importance to combating climate change through the implementation of the revised nationally determined contribution, which clearly outlines the ambitious targets of national action plans with regard to tackling and mitigating climate change with a view to achieving net-zero emissions by 2050. To that end, there is pressing need for adequate financial resources and technical support for gaining access to climate financing and other sources of funding to support developing countries, especially LDCs, LLDCs and SIDS, to achieve their development goals and commitments made under the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. In that regard, we call for renewed political will, coupled with concrete actions, taken by the international community at the upcoming twenty- seventh Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in order to preserve our planet for many generations to come.
Having recognized the multidimensional challenges and special needs of groups of countries in special situations, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic is strongly committed to the implementation of the internationally agreed development goals and programmes of action for LDCs, LLDCs, as well as other United Nations development cooperation frameworks. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic remains hopeful and firmly believes that multilateralism, with the United Nations as the lead institution, can appropriately address the multiple crises and challenges the international community is facing. We are strongly committed to supporting conflict resolution through peaceful means, guided by the United Nations Charter and other relevant international law. We are confident that development cooperation for common interests and shared benefits must continue to be at the core of international relations. To that end, more action-oriented solutions and non-politicized approaches must be adopted. It is our hope that the seventy-seventh session of the General Assembly will offer opportunities to enhance our solidarity and revive sustainable development paths in order for us to ensure transformative solutions to improve the livelihoods of our peoples and the planet.
I would like to end my statement by expressing, on behalf of the Lao Government and people, my sincere appreciations to all Member States for their kind support for our membership in the Economic and Social Council for the term 2023-2025. We stand ready to serve with humility and to make meaningful contributions to the work of the Economic and Social Council, and we pledge to discharge our duties in advancing partnership towards a more resilient and sustainable world.