At the outset, let me congratulate Mr. Csaba Korosi on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session. I wish to assure him of the full cooperation of my delegation in the fulfilment of his important duties.
We are at a watershed moment in human history, when humankind is facing interlocking challenges that threaten peace, increase the level of poverty and are likely to considerably delay the achievements of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). At this particular session, the President’s proposed motto — “Solutions through solidarity, sustainability and science” — can provide us with some transformative solutions to address them. Multilateralism continues to be under threat, yet there is no other body or entity more representative and likely to strengthen global cooperation than the United Nations.
After the past three years of reeling from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, we were hoping that the availability of vaccines against COVID-19 would stop bleeding our economy and that we would return to normalcy. Instead, the situation has worsened due to the conflict in Europe, which is having far and wide ramifications around the world.
Conflicts and political instability have led to more crises and the human tragedy of war has worsened. Their profound economic impact is slowing growth and exacerbating the cost-of-living crisis. There is uncertainty as to when and how the conflict will end, but what is clear is that the massive influx of funds needed for recovery and reconstruction will necessarily draw from the much-needed assistance to countries seeking to recover from COVID-19. Millions of people will continue to suffer worldwide, and millions more will be left behind.
While we are still confronting an uneven recovery of the global economy, the pandemic recovery gap between countries is widening, creating economic and social reverberations around the globe and injecting more uncertainty into global markets. The rising cost of commodities and energy and, in some cases, their scarcity will further weaken our economies and delay the achievement of the SDGs. Small island developing
States (SIDS) like Mauritius, which are highly vulnerable, will be particularly affected. We make an urgent appeal to all players and the international community as a whole to work towards a cessation of hostilities and seek to resolve differences through peaceful means. This is the time when we should be seriously thinking of saving our planet, slowing down the effects of climate change, preventing a worldwide recession and, most importantly, preventing a nuclear catastrophe.
We are witnessing more and more extreme weather events; higher-than-ever temperatures, droughts, fires and floods are creating unprecedented challenges across the globe and taking a heavy toll on human life and material damage. I take this opportunity to express my Government’s sympathies and solidarity to the populations affected throughout the world, especially in Pakistan.
The twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change gives us another chance to globally agree on and commit to yet unprecedented measures to keep the temperature rise below the 1.5°C target. Our responsibilities as leaders and our state responsibility should guide us in ensuring that our own future and that of our children are secure and refrain from any action that is tantamount to ecocide.
Access to climate finance is essential to addressing these existential threats. Mauritius is keen to implement its nationally determined contributions which are estimated to cost around $6.5 billion. Despite the huge costs to our economy, Mauritius has pledged to finance 35 per cent of the projects. We appeal to the international community to support us for the remaining part.
The financing needs for development projects in SIDS like Mauritius should be demand-driven and based on the prevailing economic conditions, especially in light of the budgeting stress created by the pandemic. We must also address the inequities and, in that respect, the United Nations development systems, together with our development partners, should use a unified compass and a refined and more comprehensive vulnerability index that accurately captures the vulnerabilities of SIDS so as to prioritize allocation of funds and increase the funding of development activities.
Ocean-based economies are being deeply affected. Restoring the health of our oceans is crucial to preserving our biodiversity, community livelihoods and climate resilience. Negotiations for a binding global treaty to end plastic pollution and the consensus reached on banning harmful fisheries are important steps in the right direction to turn the tide and make our oceans healthy for our sustainable development.
Mauritius is committed to protecting our oceans and, in this context, it announced during the Lisbon Ocean Conference the creation of a marine protected area around the Chagos Archipelago. We invite States, non-governmental organizations and other stakeholders to support this initiative and assist in the creation, management and enforcement of the marine protected area which, will be among the largest in the world.
The world is getting increasingly connected digitally and cyberspace is invading almost all areas of modern day-life. However, while it is providing new opportunities, it is also creating new challenges. The pandemic has brought to light the role of information and communications technology as a crucial enabler of economic and social development, but we need to be cautious about the misuse and abuse of this technology as well.
Mauritius’ socioeconomic vision and multicultural and societal values take into account and encourage the pursuit of a secure, and safe digital world for all as we strive to undermine disinformation with accurate information. We strongly value respect for and the promotion of human rights, both online and offline. We are equally keen to protect human values, promote tolerance and avoid hate speech. In this respect, we support the efforts of the international community to elaborate a comprehensive international convention on countering the use of information and communications technology for criminal purposes.
The implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in its totality is to the benefit of all, for today’s and future generations. Mauritius strongly believes that we must address the concerns of our Youth for the future. Even though we are constrained by our insularity and limited means, we are striving to increase opportunities for our youth. Providing social protection and promoting social justice remains a key priority of our Government. Despite very difficult economic challenges, we are maintaining our social welfare State, inter alia, by providing free health coverage, free education and basic pension to the elderly.
The economic empowerment of women is at the heart of various policies that we have adopted in Mauritius. Our Government programme is paving the way for a society where gender equality is adhered to, ensuring fairness and equity among all, as well as the human and social development of women. In this respect, Mauritius has made significant progress towards achieving gender equality.
We reaffirm our full solidarity with the Palestinian People and strongly condemn the senseless acts of violence against its vulnerable population.
The recent development on the world scene is again pointing to the need for us to improve our ability to respond to crises, be they manmade or natural. In this regard, we believe that the United Nations system, particularly the Security Council, needs the necessary reforms to make it more representative of the world today and thereby render it more effective. In that regard, we again reiterate the importance of expanding the Security Council with members of the African continent, based on the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration, as well as a member from SIDS, amongst others.
The fundamental pillars of the United Nations, such as development, human rights and international peace and security, are grounded in respect for and the promotion of international law. This essential bond among States enables the rule of law and global good governance to flourish, without which there would be chaos. When the United Nations and the institutions that we have created to uphold international law are not respected, democratic governance and our universal values are undermined. International Law cannot be applied selectively. It is universal, indivisible and essential to promote multilateralism, international cooperation and strengthen faith in a fair and equitable global order.
The Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice of 25 February 2019, resolution 73/295 and the Judgment of the Special Chamber of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea of 28 January 2021 have confirmed, with crystal clarity that international law, recognizes the Chagos Archipelago to be and to have always been an integral part of the territory of Mauritius. Yet, despite the aforementioned resolution, which required the colonial administration to withdraw within six months of the date of its adoption, that part of our territory remains occupied today. This situation further delays the implementation of our resettlement programme, especially for those Mauritians of Chagossian origin who were forcibly removed from there in the 1960s.
It ill behoves the United Kingdom to call on Mauritius and other African countries to respond to other allegations of illegal occupation when it is illegally occupying a part of Africa. The new Government of the United Kingdom has an opportunity to place itself on the right side of history and bring to a close this dark chapter of history involving the last colony in Africa and the last colony it ever created, as well as the shameful forcible displacement of people. Such a move would be fully consistent with the values and principles of the beloved late monarch, who we honour today and pay homage to.
What more fitting tribute could there be to the memory of that great monarch who dedicated her life to service and to upholding the values of democracy, human rights and international law, sovereignty and territorial integrity than to bring this history to an end and to do so in a manner that respects sovereignty, matters of security, environment and the fundamental rights of human beings? We urge the new Prime Minister of the United Kingdom to act with statesmanship and work with us to implement resolution 73/295 and support the completion of the decolonization of Mauritius and the resettlement of the former inhabitants of the Chagos Archipelago.
I wish to report that there have indeed been some attempts to start such a conversation. We reached a point where it would have been possible to agree on a way forward, but it appears that the United Kingdom is having some difficulty in accepting the proposal that any final agreement must be based on international law. It would be most disappointing if the ability to reach a final settlement were scuppered by its unwillingness to express a commitment to respecting the international rule of law — all the more so that Mauritius has over the years confirmed that it is prepared to enter into a long-term lease to protect the continued operations of the military base on Diego Garcia, given its contribution to regional peace and security.
Mauritius is deeply grateful for the support it has been receiving from other countries and for actions taken by international and regional organizations, including the United Nations and its specialized agencies, to implement resolution 73/295. We are particularly thankful to the United Nations for amending its world map to include the Chagos Archipelago as a part of
Mauritius; to the Universal Postal Union for ceasing to recognize the so-called British Indian Ocean Territory issued stamps; to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations for upholding the International Court of Justice Advisory Opinion and the General Assembly resolutions; and to the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea for proceeding to delimit the maritime boundary between Mauritius and Maldives in the region of the Chagos Archipelago.
I must, however, deplore the decision of the North Indian Ocean Hydrographic Commission, which, at its latest meeting, held in Bali, violated its legal obligations by failing to recognize the legal entitlement of Mauritius, which satisfies all the criteria for full membership of that organization. In that regard, it is with much regret that Mauritius has decided to suspend its participation in future activities of the North Indian Ocean Hydrographic Commission until its legal entitlement to full membership of that regional organization is fully recognized.
With regard to Tromelin, which also forms an integral part of the territory of Mauritius, we look forward to the early resolution of the dispute over that island in the spirit of friendship that characterizes the relations between Mauritius and France.
We have reached a once in a generation moment and we must make critical choices that will determine our future. The vicious cycles of violence must stop; divides and distrust must end. We should not allow the winds of discord to draw the iron curtain closed again; the winds of peace should flow smoothly. Humankind’s aspirations and yearnings for peace are resonating strongly on the world stage. Current geopolitical tensions should be de-escalated. It is time for decisive action and stronger international cooperation. More than ever, the promise to leave no one behind must guide our actions and forward path.
It is only by working together that we can begin to weave a stronger and more inclusive global economy and build a better world for our shared prosperity. We can and we must act now.