I am pleased to extend to you, Sir, and to the representatives of nations gathered here the warm greetings of Pope Francis. It is good to be together again in person.
Last year, I spoke of the dark clouds hanging over humankind; while some of those have lifted, other, darker clouds have gathered. Armed conflicts currently afflict our world to an extent not seen since 1945. In addition to the misery caused by violence and cruelty and the anxiety arising from the threat of nuclear escalation, our world continues to face the challenges of climate change, mixed migration and the ongoing coronavirus disease pandemic, while food insecurity and water scarcity now affect large portions of the global population.
No one can deny that the great challenges of our time are all global. At the same time, alongside the greater interconnection of problems, we are seeing a growing fragmentation of solutions that only fuels further tensions and divisions, as well as a generalized feeling of uncertainty and instability.
We need to recover our sense of shared identity as a single human family. If we do not focus on what unites us, seeking to promote the common good, there will only be growing isolation, marked by a reciprocal rejection and refusal that endangers multilateralism. Indeed, here, at the United Nations, we are called to work together to restore, as Pope Francis has requested, that “diplomatic style that has characterized international relations from the end of the Second World War”, making sure it is best able to implement its foundational charter and respond to the challenges faced by humankind.
When Pope Saint Paul VI visited this Hall, his heartfelt plea for no more war was broadcast around the world. Decades later, the hard-fought progress in reducing the prevalence of armed conflict globally has been called into question. This reversal deeply concerns the Holy See. Pope Francis has recognized that “we never learn” and that “unfortunately, the old story of competition between the greater Powers” continue, seeking to extend economic, ideological and military influence. And yet, the Holy See strongly believes in multilateralism and the irreplaceable role of the United Nations. For that reason, Pope Francis speaks repeatedly in support of the Organization, encouraging a process of renewal.
The General Assembly has been working on the revitalization of various aspects of its work for some time. This process takes place against the backdrop of a crisis of credibility arising not only from its apparent impotence in times of crisis, but also from the promotion of agenda in many forums that frequently shift the focus to matters that, by their divisive nature, do not strictly belong to the aims of the Organization. Pope Francis has called this “ideological colonization”. Unfortunately, key decisions are now frequently made without a genuine process of negotiation in which all countries have a say. This is at odds with the true nature of multilateral diplomacy. Unfortunately, international cooperation is hindered by the flagrant imposition of contentious policies that do not enjoy agreement, particularly in the area of human rights.
In that regard, there appears to be little desire on the part of specific States to recover consensus and authentic dialogue. Indeed, today it would appear that only the powerful and the well-funded prevail, reinventing human rights as they see fit. Instead, the fundamental human rights recognized in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights are firmly rooted in universal values, such that the right to life, freedom of thought, conscience, religion, opinion and expression, and that the institution of the family are protected. The Holy See reaffirms that human rights remain universal, objective and firmly rooted in the God-given dignity of the human person.
It is imperative that broad agreement and genuine consensus be found again soon within the Organization if it is to restore its international credibility as a true family of nations. It must extend beyond the General Assembly, to the reform of those organs with effective executive capability, such as the Security Council. The landmark resolution 76/262, requiring that the use of veto power be explained before the General Assembly, was a welcome step in that direction. The members of the Security Council, most especially the permanent members, have a crucial responsibility for the maintenance of peace and order in the world. When there is no shared vision or political will for peaceful coexistence, they become themselves the perpetrators of grave injustices. Only when the representatives of nations gathered here are able to place the common good above their own partisan interests will the legal framework of the United Nations system truly be the pledge of a secure and happy future.
At present, however, violence continues to scar our world; the devastation that war wreaks directly upon the populations of conflict zones is compounded by the indirect impact on countless other people far from the frontline. As Pope Francis has pointed out,
“war diverts attention and resources, but these are
the objectives that demand the utmost commitment:
the fight against hunger, health, and education”.
World hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition in all its forms are alarmingly on the rise. The number of
people suffering hunger in the world rose to as many as 828 million in 2021.
However, expenditure on arms, today at obscene levels, only serves to increase food insecurity, restrict access to health care and deprive generations of their rightful education. It is time to bring an end to armament hypocrisy — speaking of peace and living off weapons. Instead of squandering vast sums on military equipment, it would be far wiser to invest in avoiding war, rather than preparing for it.
The war in Ukraine has exacerbated already concerning global trends, including rising food and fuel prices and increased displacement. The conflict has also brought renewed attention to nuclear security and the risk of nuclear escalation. With the onset of conflict, a key source of staple grains and cooking oil for countries that rely on food imports was interrupted, placing millions more at risk of food insecurity and starvation. Additionally, the war has also exposed the vulnerability of short-sighted energy policies that rely exclusively on the single source of fossil fuel, rather than developing clean and sustainable alternatives. It is the poorest among us who suffer the most. Addressing these crises requires urgent and concerted action.
Furthermore, the war in Ukraine not only undermines the nuclear non-proliferation regime, but also presents us with the danger of nuclear devastation, through either escalation or accident. Any threat of nuclear weapons use is repugnant and merits unequivocal condemnation.
In the meantime, Europe’s largest refugee crisis since the Second World War only adds to the millions of refugees throughout Africa, the Middle East and Asia. Mixed migration is a global phenomenon that needs to be addressed accordingly. In that regard, implementing the vision and objectives of both the Global Compact for Safe, Regular and Orderly Migration, as well as the Global Compact on Refugees, remains among the best ways to encourage international cooperation and burden-sharing. States must continue to make every effort to generate the necessary conditions for people to live in peace, security and dignity in their countries of origin.
Our common home continues to be gravely affected by the adverse impacts of climate change. Indeed, we have grown so used to hearing of extreme weather events, and yet those phenomena are clear signs of our failure to address climate change. Moreover, multilateral environmental agreements have already laid out obligations for States parties that would prove effective in tackling the threat posed by climate change. In that regard, when the international community gathers at the twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Sharm El Sheikh, it is to be hoped that there will be the political will to take more decisive and transformative decisions to protect the environment by accelerating global climate action through stronger mitigation measures, scaled-up adaptation efforts and enhanced flows of appropriate finance. On this issue, I am pleased to note that the Holy See, acting in the name and on behalf of the Vatican City State, recently deposited its instruments of accession both to United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and to the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, to contribute to the efforts of all States to work together to respond effectively to challenges posed by climate change.
The digital environment also demands greater attention, given the increasingly important role that information and communication technologies play in our daily lives. Pope Francis points out that
“the potential of digital technology is enormous, yet the possible negative impact of its abuse in the area of human trafficking, the planning of terrorist activities, the spread of hatred and extremism, the manipulation of information and ... in the area of child abuse, is equally significant. Public opinion and lawmakers are finally coming to realize this.”
This is the logic of the appeal of Pope Francis to work together for peace, “not a peace based on the balance of weapons, [or] on mutual fear,” but rather one born of encounter and dialogue. For this,
“it is necessary to pass from the strategies of political, economic and military power to a plan for global peace: no to a world divided among conflicting powers; yes to a world united among peoples and civilizations that respect each other”.