It is with great pleasure that I take the floor at the General Assembly, at a time when the world faces a very complex situation that requires our Organization to strengthen its role and its ability to formulate the most appropriate responses in order to be able to tackle the serious challenges facing the world.
I would like to wish Mr. Dennis Francis all the best during his term of office, starting now, as the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session. I would also like to express my thanks to Mr. Antonio Guterres for his tireless efforts in service of peace and development under very challenging circumstances.
As I did not attend the session of the General Assembly held in 2022.1 did not have an opportunity to express, on behalf of Angola and Angolans, our views on and concerns about the problems facing the world, which were exacerbated by the eruption of the conflict between Russia and Ukraine in that year. In spite of the great efforts made to create a more peaceful and prosperous world, we recognize that. 78 years after the founding of our Organization, it has not been possible to build a solid foundation of trust among nations in order to prevent the emergence of pockets of tension in a number of places, which have degenerated into open conflicts in Africa. Asia. Latin America, the Middle East and now in Europe, where a war of such large proportions as the one currently being waged was not expected.
The management of interests at the global level in terms of security, science and technology, as well as the management of resources in general terms, in particular of strategic raw materials and energy sources, does not yet meet the interests and expectations of the different nations and peoples of our planet. It is therefore essential that we do everything in our power to continuously promote respect for, and the observance of, the values enshrined in the Charter of United Nations and in international law, so that we can correct the dangerous trajectory that the world took after the fall of the Berlin Wall.
In discussing contemporary problems in international relations, we highlight the importance of objectively assessing the nature and origin of conflicts and the prospects for resolving them, while always upholding the universal norms that govern relations among States. We must recognize that the gap between developing and developed countries remains an unacceptable reality, because in many cases there is no real political will to overcome it, resulting in difficulties in accessing the financial and material resources that are needed to carry out development projects. We must also recognize the constraints imposed on technology transfer, which are factors that delay the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) set out in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. I would like to welcome the call of the Secretary-General for reform of the global financial architecture and for SDG stimulus funding to the tune of at least $500 billion dollars per year in order to tackle emerging challenges.
Because developing countries are not adequately represented in most global governance institutions, they are not in a position to express their sensitivities and make their points of view heard at the appropriate levels, and thereby to contribute to the formulation of realistic solutions to their problems. That situation generates anxiety and frustration among the most vulnerable populations who, by not having their expectations met, become easily prone to negative influences that are dangerous to the order and stability of their respective countries.
Over the past decade. Africa has witnessed transformations that have galvanized changes with an impact on upcoming generations. Many African countries have their resolved conflicts, invested as much as they could in socioeconomic development and have promoted the education of their citizens, making them more informed and ready to contribute to the economic and social development of their respective countries. 
Democratic transitions have become regular, and essential institutions for consolidating democracy have become more active and therefore more capable of sustaining and solidifying the democratic achievements in our nations. That is a record that should be commended, and we are convinced that everything must be done to prevent a return to the models that prevailed before the advent of democracy in Africa. However, the lack of economic and social prospects in many of our countries creates fertile ground for unrest and the weakening of our continent’s recent democracies. It is therefore urgent and imperative that real support be given to development through financing in favourable conditions for the construction of production and distribution infrastructure and water-related infrastructure, road and railway routes, basic sanitation, the construction of schools, as well as direct private investment in African economies, so that Africa can make a greater contribution to the world economy.
In Africa, we have sought ways out of the current state of affairs, such as the initiative to establish the African Continental Free Trade Area, which has more than 1 billion consumers and is therefore an important platform to boost progress on the continent. Africa’s international partners must believe in and invest in our market because they will surely see a satisfactory return on their investments in the different sectors of our economies in which they decide to invest.
We would like to meet the expectations of young Africans who are forced to try to make their dreams come true outside their continent in contexts that are almost always difficult to adapt to, in addition to the major life risks that many of them face when undertaking dangerous crossings of the Mediterranean.
Angola has promoted dialogue which, in our opinion, should not be limited to political and diplomatic spaces, but should also include a wide range of protagonists, including civil society organizations, companies and individuals, with a prominent place for young people, who are the real driving force behind the changes we are seeking in order to guarantee the progress of our nations. It was in that spirit that Angola decided to host the Pan-African Forum for a Culture of Peace in Africa, organized in partnership with the African Union and UNESCO, whose third edition will be held in November this year in Luanda. The Forum, also known as the Biennale of Luanda, is a privileged platform for exchange among different cultures, religions and social models, through interactive and constructive sessions aimed at identifying, promoting and disseminating viable and inclusive models of peaceful conflict resolution on the African continent, and can serve as a potentially inspiring reference for other regions of the world.
The Republic of Angola has sought to contribute its experience in terms of peacebuilding, harmony and national reconciliation to the resolution of conflicts on the African continent, with special emphasis on what is happening in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, where we believe it will be possible to build a basis of trust between the belligerents, which will contribute to an easing of tension in the Great Lakes region and lead to the long-awaited peace. Those efforts to contain the spread of terrorism and other destabilizing actions entail high financial costs that our countries are not always able to bear, and which can therefore jeopardize the success of the peacemaking operations that are being carried out and dash the hopes that are nurtured with regard to those processes.
It is therefore essential that we reaffirm the need for adequate, sustainable and predictable funding for efforts in the fight against terrorism on the continent, which is why I believe it is appropriate to renew our call to the United Nations, particularly the Security Council, for the use of fixed contributions for peacekeeping operations mandated by the African Union.
Until relatively recently, the Sahel region was plagued only by the actions of terrorist groups reinforced by mercenaries for hire, who, having found a power vacuum in Libya, settled there and expanded into neighbouring countries. Added to that already dangerous situation, a wave of unconstitutional changes of power led by the military emerged in more or less the same region. Those new powers should not be rewarded with the possibility of sharing with us the same political stages. Alternatively, we will convey the wrong message that is contrary to the principles we advocate.
We are increasingly convinced of the existence of an invisible hand interested in destabilizing our continent, only concerned with expanding its sphere of influence, which we know will not provide the necessary support for the economic and social development of African countries.
The international community is concerned not only about the situation in the Sahel countries, in the Horn of Africa, in Mozambique and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, but also about the conflict in the Sudan, which, in addition to the high number of deaths, injuries and the destruction of the country’s infrastructure, has caused countless internally displaced people and refugees and has become one of the biggest humanitarian disasters the world has ever seen, the consequences of which are being felt by neighbouring countries.
The world must not forget the suffering of the Palestinian people, let alone ignore the need to resolve the conflict in the Middle East, especially the Israeli- Palestinian conflict, whose formula of two States living side by side peacefully has for years been found by the United Nations to not have made any progress and to lack implementation. The international community runs the risk of being accused of prioritizing the conflict in Europe to the detriment of others, because they are in the Middle East and Africa, including the conflict in the Sudan which is as deadly and devastating as that of Ukraine but receives less international media coverage and less attention by the major centres of decisions on global peace and security.
In Europe, the war between Russia and Ukraine deserves our full attention. There is an urgent need to put an immediate end to the war, given the levels of human and material destruction there, the risk of escalation into a major conflict on a global scale and the impact of its harmful effects on energy and food security.
All the evidence indicates that it is unlikely that there will be winners and losers on the battlefield, which is why the parties concerned should be encouraged to prioritize dialogue and diplomacy as soon as possible, to establish a ceasefire and to negotiate a lasting peace — not only for the warring countries, but to guarantee Europe’s security and contribute to world peace and security.
In the past three years, we have faced a major global challenge posed by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has demonstrated the importance and strength of solidarity among nations as a basis for tackling and solving major global problems.
This example should serve as a paradigm for our behaviour in facing other challenges, especially those relating to the fight against poverty and the disparities between developing and developed countries in the field of science and technology, which, as we all know, are critical factors for boosting the development and well-being of the peoples of our planet.
Coordination among all the world’s nations, which has been the keynote in the process of combating COVID-19, has highlighted the central role of multilateral institutions. We therefore believe that pluralism in international relations is the main guarantee of the effectiveness of the actions we take to resolve the major issues affecting humankind today.
It is clear that, from the point of view of multilateralism, the United Nations needs to be empowered to play an effective role in fulfilling its duties and that there is an urgent need to reform the Security Council so that it reflects the reality of the times, which is totally and profoundly different from that experienced immediately after the end of the Second World War.
The Republic of Angola therefore defends the need to review the representation of the different regions of the world on the Security Council. In this area, as far as the African continent is concerned, we defend the Ezulwini Consensus and the Sirte Declaration, which establish the need for Africa to be granted permanent membership of the Security Council, with all the privileges inherent in that category.
For decades, the United Nations has been dealing with a series of situations in which it has adopted a series of resolutions that are simply ignored and disrespected, without any consequences for those involved. I think we need to reflect together on the need to try to create mechanisms to strengthen the Organization’s authority so that we do not discredit it or weaken its decisive role in building an effective world peace and security architecture, to which all the world’s nations must feel bound with a strong sense of commitment, regardless of their economic and military power.
It is therefore appropriate to emphasize the importance of complying with the current resolutions on the embargo against Cuba and the decades-long conflict in the Middle East between Israel and Palestine.
It is important to remember that in 2021.1 took part in a Security Council meeting in this city (see S/PV.8802) to discuss the issue of lifting the arms embargo on the Central African Republic. Since then, there has been no progress on that issue, which seriously affects the exercise of a fundamental right of countries to have their own national army to guarantee the defence of independence, sovereignty and the normal functioning of the country’s institutions. Once again. I would like to reiterate the relevance of putting that issue on the agenda 
of the Security Council, so that a decision can be taken that will allow the Central African Republic to fully assume its role as an independent and sovereign State, without having to resort to hiring foreign paramilitary forces for an indefinite period of time.
The Republic of Angola is chairing the Organization of African. Caribbean and Pacific States (OEACP) Summit of Heads of State and Government, which gives us the responsibility to address some aspects of that organization. The negotiation of the partnership agreement between the OEACP and the European Union was successfully concluded, and the signing ceremony is expected to take place soon, thus marking a new phase in that cooperation, adapted to the current reality and the aspirations of the member States of both organizations. This important instrument, which will be the basis of cooperation between the OEACP and the European Union, lays the foundation for actions in a wide range of areas, with a particular focus on environmental sustainability and climate change, human and social development and migration and mobility.
The OEACP comprises 79 countries from three continents and three oceans, representing enormous potential for cooperation for those who establish partnerships in priority areas for the member States, thus generating reciprocal benefits. I would like to take this opportunity to appeal to investors to look to the OEACP countries as a safe destination with important advantages for their business.
I would also like to take this opportunity to speak briefly about the issue of climate change, which is currently a central concern for humankind. Governments and societies in all our countries. The international community must do its utmost to fulfil the promises made at the two most recent Conferences of the Parties on climate finance, so that at the twenty-eighth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change summit, to be held in the United Arab Emirates, that issue no longer takes up a significant part of the agenda and we can focus concretely on the need to urgently implement the measures to be taken to reduce polluting gases, deforestation and global warming and, thus, save our planet Earth while there is still time.
Allow me to take this opportunity, on behalf of the Angolan Government and people, to express our deepest sympathy to the authorities and the people of Morocco and Libya for the sudden loss of thousands of human lives and valuable national heritage as a result of natural disasters. We express our total solidarity with the families and loved ones who feel the pain of the irreparable loss of loved ones.
