I am honoured to speak before the General Assembly today, and I express my deep appreciation for the General Assembly. The Assembly serves as a unique platform for global cooperation and offers hope for a better world.
I want to express my sincere congratulations to President Francis on his election and convey my best wishes for his continued success in leading the Assembly. I would also like to extend my warmest regard to Secretary-General Guterres for his continuous efforts to achieve peace in the world and for standing firm in defence of the Charter of the United Nations, international law and human rights in the face of the great adversity of our times. His leadership fosters trust in the United Nations. Rebuilding trust and reigniting global solidarity are more necessary than ever for reconciliation, good understanding and more cooperation — they are the only way we can face today’s common and global challenges that not only affect the present but also risking the future of the next generations. It should all begin by assessing regions and countries on the basis of their contribution rather than their failures.
Since 1955, when Albania became a State Member of the United Nations, a great deal has changed. Once a self-isolated country. Albania now proudly stands as a NATO member and has initiated accession negotiations with the European Union. Currently. Albania is concluding its first term as a non-permanent member of the Security Council, and this month, we are productively presiding over that United Nations body for the second time. As part of the western Balkans. Albania continues to make an unwavering contribution to peace and stability in the region. Albanians play a crucial role in south-eastern Europe. We constitute the large majority in two independent republics. Albania and Kosova. We form a constitutive minority in North Macedonia and Montenegro and a significant minority in the southern part of Serbia.
Throughout our history. Albania has adhered to a policy of friendship and good-neighbourly relations. We remain deeply concerned by the crises that recur from time to time in relations among its neighbours. Both Albania and Kosova have consistently championed peace over tension and conflicts, and we remain committed to that path. We hope to be recognized for our contribution and not to allow our endeavours to be overshadowed by opposing narratives. In that context. Albania supports the difficult yet not ongoing dialogue between Kosova and Serbia, facilitated through careful mediation by the European Union and strongly supported by the United States. At the same time. Albania remains sensitive to Kosova’s integrity and prosperity. 
Kosova has managed to heal many deep wounds from the tragic past. The rise of the Serbs in Kosova reflects European norms and values, and the same should be applied to the Albanian minority in the Presevo Valley in southern Serbia. Unfortunately, we remain concerned about the passivization of their residential addresses and the absence of substantial investments and economic incentives in that region. Kosova has demonstrated that pain need not breed hostility but can translate into understanding and support. However. Kosova still awaits recognition of its independence by many countries. I hope that those countries will soon acknowledge Kosova’s contribution to a fairer and more peaceful global community and grant it the recognition it deserves. Recognize Kosova’s independence.
Despite being a small nation with a young democracy. Albania has a history marked by wars it did not choose and domination it neither sought nor accepted. While those memories are painful, they have also imparted invaluable lessons. It is precisely because of its history that Albania places great importance on international law as its foremost defence. We firmly embrace the principles underpinning the rules-based international order, where relations among nations are founded on respect, rather than sheer power. That commitment is why we have consistently and unequivocally condemned the military aggression against Ukraine, and we will continue to do so. Despite our size. Albania has been actively engaged on the international stage both regionally and globally in the pursuit of peace and security. However, we recognize that sustainable development is an integral component of achieving international peace and security.
On the other hand, meaningful sustainable development is unattainable without a foundation of genuine peace and security. Sadly, the unprovoked and unjustified Russian act of aggression against its neighbour speaks louder than our words. This absurd and malicious war has directly and indirectly affected various dimensions of sustainable development, not only for Ukraine and the region but also for the entire globe. This senseless war has disrupted trade, caused economic instability, destroyed infrastructure, including transport networks and industrial facilities, and diverted attention and resources away from addressing shared challenges, promoting development and implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The war in Ukraine has strained regional stability and affected cooperation among countries. It has highlighted geopolitical tensions and strained diplomatic relations, hindering international cooperation on sustainable development initiatives. As we have witnessed, the spillover effects of the war, which include displacement, migration and economic and security concerns, can have global ramifications that impede progress towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Albania welcomed the SDG Summit called by the Secretary-General and the political declaration adopted therein. It is a milestone in re-energizing our joint efforts and commitments to implementing the 2030 Agenda. We firmly believe that the success of the SDGs lies in our collective efforts to address challenges that hinder sustainable development. Collective efforts mean the urgent need for decisive action to better support developing countries. Albania acknowledges the imperative to introduce reforms and stands ready to work alongside the international community in ensuring and enabling an environment that allows developing countries to actively participate in and benefit from the global economy.
I would like to emphasize that Albania is committed to reducing the levels of domestic poverty and inequality by 2027 and 2030, in line with our nationally determined climate contributions. We recognize the need for comprehensive policy commitments to drive the necessary energy, food, digital and social transitions necessary to achieve those benchmarks. Aligning our national budget with the SDGs, mainstreaming gender equality, revitalizing public sector capacities and strengthening our data and monitoring systems are among the fundamental actions we prioritize. Albania recognizes the significance of this session as a pivotal moment for our world. It is an opportunity to shift from fear to hope and from deepening pessimism to accelerated action. We are committed to playing our part and collaborating with the international community to ensure the successful realization of the 2030 Agenda.
I would also like to bring the Assembly’s attention to Albania’s position on one of the most debated issues today, that of multilateralism. Today’s critical challenges show that universal reason is the only way out. We recognize that peace is indivisible. We cannot secure peace on the backs of people who perish in war. No one can truly have lasting peace until everyone has it. Albania recognizes that human rights are indivisible. We cannot ensure basic rights for all if we select one subset of rights and ignore the rest. 
The suffering caused by torture or famine is hard to witness. It is unacceptable and unnecessary suffering that can be eliminated if we embrace all civil, political, socioeconomic and cultural rights.
Albania is a candidate for the Human Rights Council in the upcoming elections next month. If elected, we will be a champion of human rights in their broadest sense. That includes women’s rights, children’s rights, minority rights and the fundamental right to equal opportunities. We will work with other countries to protect, promote and defend human rights and freedoms as a vital condition for individual and collective development and prosperity.
On the regional front, we eagerly anticipate the upcoming European Union-Western Balkans summit, to be held in Tirana in October. We are committed to transforming our region into an example of trust and partnership that transcends borders and communities. Multilateralism is central to our collective endeavours. It is, above all, a vision of how States should cooperate to achieve better results for everyone. Fundamentally, it is about expectations of acceptable behaviour in the future. Multilateralism is a normative key. It requires us to consider not only whether existing arrangements are effective or efficient, but also whether existing multilateral practices and processes are fair and just.
It is high time that we engage unconditionally, fully and in good faith to achieve meaningful reforms of our Organization, with the Security Council at its core. No State. Government or individual can be above the law. Albania supports the reform of the United Nations and its main bodies, with the aim of strengthening the Organization’s ability to address the current emerging challenges and threats to international peace, security and development. The power of the Security Council rests in its capacity to intervene decisively in the service of peace and security. The question nowadays should no longer be whether the Council can interfere in the domestic realm of States or not. Rather, the question should be: how can the Council intervene in an intelligent, reflective and timely manner in the service of the values and mandate for which it was created?
Since gaining independence in 1912, my country has undergone significant territorial transformation. Currently. Albania boasts captivating urban and rural landscapes, which I wholeheartedly encourage everyone here to explore. I have mentioned that not merely to extend the invitation to visit Albania, but also to underscore the importance of the territorial transformation that lies before us. In the face of climate change, that challenge runs like a red thread through the 17 Sustainable Development Goals. I hope that my country and our nations can effectively address that challenge by safeguarding our natural resources and cultural heritage. Our approach should involve respecting the diversity of those resources and collaborating with communities engaged in both environmental causes and cultural preservation efforts. I firmly believe that that approach reinforces democracy — a political system uniquely capable of ensuring sustainable and fair development. It is in such a world that our younger generations can find joy and prosperity. Our collective efforts can pave the way for them to tell a story of successful collaboration — one that centres around us and this Organization.
