I congratulate His Excellency Mr. Dennis Francis on assuming the 
presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session and thank the previous President. His Excellency Mr. Csaba Korosi, for his hard work over the past year.
The world continue s to face a multitude of challenge s that transcend boundaries. From deteriorating climate trends to deep-rooted poverty, rising tensions and ravaging pandemics, the challenges plague us all, regardless of our background or location, and require bold and concerted action. International politics is becoming increasingly fragmented, leading to the division and erosion of multilateralism. The growing trend to intolerance and discrimination, in particular Islamophobia and the alarming surge in hate speech, is disturbing. In order to curb that challenge through our centuries-old tradition of diversity and multiculturalism. Azerbaijan firmly believes in fostering dialogue, mutual understanding and respect among different cultures and religions. The Government of Azerbaijan has consistently promoted intercultural and interfaith dialogue through significant global initiatives such as the Baku process and the Peace4Culture Global Call.
Amid the growing challenges, it will be vital for the United Nations to continue to galvanize international solidarity and cooperation. Our Organization has a mandate to ensure that every nation has an equal voice and is treated on the same footing. The purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations are binding worldwide and must be applied consistently, not selectively. Azerbaijan advocates for a reinvigorated and reformed multilateral system with the United Nations at its core, underpinned by strict adherence to the norms and principles of international law and their non-selective application. We look forward to the Summit of the Future as an opportunity to reinvigorate global action and reflect on our collective commitment to the Charter and multilateralism.
In its national capacity and as the current Chair of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM). Azerbaijan has continued to contribute to peace, security and the global sustainable development agenda, and has spared no effort to promote international solidarity and multilateralism. Since the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. Azerbaijan has been at the forefront in advancing a number of global initiatives to overcome that challenge. The lingering effects of the pandemic have created a pressing need for us to redouble our global cooperation and solidarity efforts, anchored in high-level political engagement and collaboration involving all vital stakeholders. International cooperation and political engagement require the involvement of various stakeholders, including women and young people. Azerbaijan has made that a key focus of its NAM chairmanship through the foundation of the NAM Youth Organization, with a permanent secretariat in Baku, in line with the Shusha Accords, and by initiating the establishment of a NAM platform for women. Azerbaijan also spearheaded the foundation of the NAM Parliamentary Network. We must strengthen our joint efforts to tackle the pandemic’s consequences and consolidate efforts for the global recovery from COVID-19.
In the light of that. President Aliyev of Azerbaijan initiated the establishment of a United Nations high- level panel on the post-pandemic global recovery. In March 2023 we hosted the Summit of the NAM Contact Group in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, at which, in his capacity as NAM Chair, our President declared the establishment of two global calls to support the post-pandemic recovery of Africa and small island developing States. As the first donor. Azerbaijan announced that it would allocate funds to both calls. Since 2020. Azerbaijan has provided humanitarian, economic and technical assistance amounting to $300 million to more than 130 nations.
As we approach the midpoint of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, many parts of the world are struggling to achieve our shared vision of the future. It is imperative that we work to confront those challenges in concert. Azerbaijan has been a passionate supporter of the universal promotion and implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals since their adoption. We have been pursuing transformational changes by remodelling our economy and focusing on sustainability, inclusive growth, social justice and clean energy. Azerbaijan’s gross domestic product (GDP) has tripled in less than two decades, and our poverty levels have fallen from 49 to 5 per cent. Our external public debt is expected to be approximately 10 per cent of GDP for 2023, one of the lowest in the world. Achieving a clean environment and green growth is one of the five priority areas of our new national development strategy. Azerbaijan has voluntarily pledged to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions by up to 40 per cent by 2050 and to establish a green-energy zone in its Garabagh and East Zangazur regions.
Azerbaijan’s role in global energy security has further expanded from that of a traditional crude-oil 
supplier to that of a reliable natural-gas provider. With the completion of the Southern Gas Corridor, the biggest infrastructure project in Europe. Azerbaijan is now supplying natural gas to five more European countries. At a time when European energy security is facing unprecedented challenges, seven countries in Europe are currently receiving natural gas from Azerbaijan, and that number will increase to 10 in the near future. Our projected increase in renewable electricity production will enable us to become an exporter of green electricity to European countries through the landmark trans-regional Black Sea submarine cable project that Azerbaijan has embarked on with partner countries. Azerbaijan is also a key player in the development of trans-regional connectivity projects. In 2022 we increased transit flow by 70 per cent by boosting investments in transportation infrastructure and widening cooperation with our regional partners.
Despite the unprecedented suffering, deprivation and devastation that the people of Azerbaijan were subjected to during Armenia’s 30-year military occupation. Azerbaijan initiated a normalization agenda and offered peace to Armenia, based on equal and reciprocal respect for the legitimate interests of both sides through mutual recognition of and respect for each other’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and the inviolability of their borders. In the past few months, thanks to the concerted efforts of international partners, the negotiations have intensified and yielded limited, but promising, results. But we are seeing Armenia repeat its past patterns by pretending to participate in talks, backtracking on previously undertaken commitments at the last minute and committing political, military, and other provocations at every stage of the negotiations so as to avoid taking concrete steps. As a result, the efforts for durable peace between Azerbaijan and Armenia have once again become hostage to Armenia’s policy of revanchism. Since November 2020, armed formations, numbering more than 10.000 and equipped with heavy offensive weaponry, have been maintained by Armenia for almost three years on Azerbaijan’s sovereign soil, including by abusing the Lachin corridor in an attempt to fuel separatism. While engaging in negotiations during this period, we have consistently drawn the attention of all international actors involved in the normalization process and of the wider international community to the serious threat posed by Armenia’s unwillingness to fulfil its commitments, and we have called for a peaceful solution.
While our legitimate and fact-based concerns were acknowledged behind closed doors, that was not translated into real steps and targeted public messages persuading Armenia to honour its commitments. Armenia therefore felt emboldened and once again bought into the delusion that it would be better off by opting for a status quo based on an illegal military presence and line-of-contact logic in the sovereign territory of Azerbaijan. It also proceeded to ignite tension through a global campaign of manipulation and disinformation targeting Azerbaijan’s sovereignty and territorial integrity and blatantly interfering in its internal affairs. For months now Armenia has mobilized every available resource for its manipulation campaign, based on fabricated allegations of blockade, humanitarian crisis or ethnic cleansing. To that end. Armenia recklessly politicized and essentially obstructed the delivery of goods to the Garabagh region of Azerbaijan in service of its separatist agenda and blocked the consistent efforts of several international actors to find a legitimate and practical solution through dialogue.
On 18 September, a simultaneous delivery of humanitarian goods through Aghdam and Lachin — which was offered by Azerbaijan months ago and positively received by all the international actors involved — was finally conducted by the International Committee of the Red Cross, as Armenia was forced to withdraw its weeks-long obstructions. Azerbaijan, like the broader international community, welcomed that development, hoping it would finally lead to de-escalation on the ground and pave the way for restoring the focus on pressing issues pertinent to inter-State normalization. However. Armenia failed to meet those expectations yet again, resorting instead to military provocation in an attempt to continue its blame game against Azerbaijan. As a result, one day later, mines planted by an Armenian sabotage group led to the tragic death of six Azerbaijani citizens — two civilians and four police officers — in two separate explosions. Another six police officers were seriously injured.
In response. Azerbaijan launched local counterterrorism measures to neutralize the illegal armed formations in order to preserve its sovereignty and territorial integrity and protect the safety and security of its residents. The measures were limited, proportionate and aimed exclusively at neutralizing legitimate military targets by using high-precision ammunition, in full compliance with the norms of humanitarian law. Every possible measure was taken to avoid collateral 
damage. In less than 24 hours, the horrific scale of the illegal militarization of Azerbaijan’s territories became clear, with the neutralization of more than 90 military outposts. 20 combat vehicles. 40 artillery pieces. 30 mortars, six electromagnetic warfare systems and two anti-aircraft missile systems. More evidence is being collected now as the disarmament efforts continue on the ground. No sovereign State would tolerate an illegal military presence on its soil, and Azerbaijan is no exception. Our counter-terror measures achieved the goals that had been set. Armenia and its subordinate illegal regime were forced to agree to disarm, dismantle all illegal structures and withdraw from Azerbaijan. The reason that this did not happen peacefully lies in Armenia’s brazen aggressiveness and a lack of adequate action on the part of the third-party facilitators involved.
Having concluded our counter-terror measures, we have now embarked on the practical implementation of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts on the ground. The long-overdue meeting of a special representative of the Government of Azerbaijan with representatives of Armenian residents finally took place on 21 September in the city of Yevlakh. The dialogue will continue as a format for directly discussing the Government’s reintegration plans and addressing issues related to restoring and operating infrastructure and the delivery of humanitarian goods and public services. The central Government institutions have begun rapidly carrying out the necessary humanitarian support measures, and we have mobilized every effort to address the immediate needs of the local civilians. On that point. I want to reiterate that Azerbaijan is determined to reintegrate the ethnic Armenian residents of the Garabagh region as equal citizens. The Constitution, the national legislation of Azerbaijan and the international commitments we have undertaken provide a solid basis for that.
Despite all the serious challenges created by Armenia’s destructive position. Azerbaijan once again reaffirms its readiness for a genuine dialogue and negotiations with Armenia on the basis of equal and reciprocal respect for each other’s legitimate interests. We maintain a firm belief that there is a historic opportunity for Azerbaijan and Armenia to establish good-neighbourly relations and coexist side by side in peace as two sovereign States within their internationally recognized borders. It is high time to seize that opportunity.
To that end, it is essential for Armenia to finally realize that rejecting the offer of a just and equal peace — based on its hopes of better conditions for achieving its revanchist aims in future — is not viable and has no chance of succeeding. The Armenian leadership’s verbal statements on recognizing the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Azerbaijan, including the Garabagh region, must be translated into tangible steps. It will be critical to ensure meaningful engagement by international actors that are able and willing to support Azerbaijan and Armenia in that endeavour in a fair, impartial and unbiased manner. It is equally important for all who are unable to be honest brokers to refrain from projecting their short-sighted agendas onto the process. Every effort should be made to build on the progress already achieved and finalize the normalization process without further delay. Azerbaijan is determined and committed to promoting the normalization agenda.
Along with the interstate process of normalization with Armenia. Azerbaijan has launched large-scale rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts to eliminate the harsh consequences of the 30 years of military occupation of our territories, aimed at safeguarding the right of hundreds of thousands of Azerbaijanis to eventually exercise their violated right to a safe and dignified return. Thanks to the Government’s tireless efforts, life is now returning to areas that experienced unprecedented vandalism in the 30 years of Armenian military occupation. The first groups of displaced families have already returned to their places of origin.
Regrettably, the massive contamination of Azerbaijan’s territory with landmines and other explosive devices remains a significant obstacle to the smooth progress of rehabilitation and reconstruction and is a threat to the people returning home after three decades of displacement. Armenia’s refusal to share all of its maps of mined areas, and its continued planting of landmines, booby traps and other explosives even after its declared cessation of all military activities, are further aggravating the situation and increasing the human toll. Since November 2020. 315 individuals have fallen victim to landmines planted by Armenia. Some mines were transferred to and planted in Azerbaijani territory after the signing of the trilateral statement. Given the ongoing landmine problem in Azerbaijan and the challenges facing our national agencies in addressing it, we urgently need greater international support in strengthening our humanitarian mine-action capacity, which would not only aid in demining efforts 
but also contribute to the global campaign against landmines and demonstrate a commitment to peace and cooperation in the region.
Ensuring justice for serious war crimes and crimes against humanity is vital to healing the wounds of the past conflict. In addition to upholding the rights and interests of the victims, accountability and redress are also critical prerequisites on the path to genuine post-conflict normalization and reconciliation. Over more than 30 years of aggression and occupation. Armenia desecrated and destroyed Azerbaijani cultural heritage, including numerous monuments of world and national importance, mosques, temples, mausoleums, museums, art galleries, archaeological sites and libraries. The fate of almost 4.000 citizens of Azerbaijan, including 719 civilians who went missing during the conflict, remains unknown. Although several mass graves have been discovered in the liberated territories, exposing the wilful killing of Azerbaijani civilians and other persons protected under international humanitarian law. Armenia refuses to clarify the whereabouts of missing persons. Resolving that issue is essential not only in terms of accountability and the rights of the victims and their families, but also for post-conflict reconciliation and normalization.
Between 1987 and 1991. Armenia forcibly expelled some 300.000 Azerbaijanis from their ancestral homeland in a blatant violation of international law. All Azerbaijani settlements and place names in Armenia were renamed, and our historical and cultural heritage was deliberately vandalized and destroyed. Despite repeated calls by the western Azerbaijan community for launching a dialogue and ensuring a safe and dignified return to their homeland, the Government of Armenia denied them the exercise of their fundamental right to return, as enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees and other important international acts.
While remaining committed to its international obligations and open to constructive dialogue. Azerbaijan will not tolerate violations of international law and will continue taking appropriate steps at the international level. In particular. Azerbaijan’s initiation of judicial proceedings to hold Armenia accountable for grave violations of international human rights law, and to bring to justice those responsible for such crimes, is a significant step towards achieving accountability.
Azerbaijan is fully committed to the objectives of a peaceful, secure, stable and prosperous South Caucasus. As a responsible actor, we will continue our efforts to advance post-conflict peace-building, reintegration and peaceful coexistence, while sparing no effort in all relevant areas, whether those are post-COVID-19 recovery, the global development agenda or energy security. The challenges that we face today require a renewed commitment to international cooperation and solidarity. It is only through joint efforts that we can overcome the complex challenges of the present and future to build a brighter future for ourselves and for generations to come.
