On behalf of His Excellency Captain Ibrahim Traore, transitional President and Head of State. I convey the warm greetings of the people and the Government of Burkina Faso.
On behalf of the people of Burkina Faso. I pay a humble tribute to the memory of those great world leaders who embodied the hopes and dreams for a just and equitable world through their commitment, determination and spirit of sacrifice. I am thinking in particular of Fidel Castro of Cuba. Patrice Emery Lumumba of the Congo. Modibo Keita of Mali. Ruben Um Nyobe and Felix Mournie of Cameroon. Sylvanus Olympic of Togo. Che Guevara of Argentina. Martin Luther King and Malcolm X of the United States of America. Nelson Mandela of South Africa. Jomo Kenyatta of Kenya. Amilcar Cabral of Guinea-Bissau and Cabo Verde. Marien Ngouabi of the Republic of the Congo and Captain Thomas Isidore Noel Sankara of Burkina Faso, among others.
Most of those leaders were executed violently; others were assassinated, dying in prison or by poisoning. Their only crime in each case was embodying the dreams, ambitions and hopes of peoples that had been wounded, raped, violated and pillaged.
My intention as I stand at this lofty rostrum before the United Nations on behalf of Burkina Faso, a country of upstanding people, is not to beat my breast in lamentation or to make a predictable speech. I was sent here, instead, as a sacrificial lamb to tell the Assembly that State lies, diplomatic hypocrisy, the thirst for power, the frenetic quest for profit, the diabolical spirit of domination and exploitation of man by man — those are the true wounds that poison our coexistence and drive all societies toward perdition, including our Organization.
Allow me to here cite excerpts from the statements delivered from this very rostrum, at the opening of this seventy-eighth session, by His Excellency Secretary- General Antonio Guterres; His Excellency Mr. Joe Biden. President of the United States; His Excellency Mr. Dennis Francis. Permanent Representative of Trinidad and Tobago to the United Nations, elected President of the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session; and His Excellency Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva. President of the Republic of Brazil, respectively.
Let me quote from the first statement:
“Our world is becoming unhinged”. “Bodies are washing ashore from the same Mediterranean Sea where billionaires sunbathe”, (see A/78/PV.4)
And from the second:
“We gather once more at an inflection point in world history ... [We have] a common cause ... [and] share a common vision of the future of the world in which our children do not go hungry” (ibid).
The third states:
“In spite of the many .., challenges we face, we do have the capacity to effect change. ... We do not lack capacity. What we lack is the will to act .., we can deliver .., peace, progress, prosperity and sustainability to everyone, everywhere”, (ibid.)
Fourthly, the President of Brazil mentioned the issues of dissonance and of the Security Council’s paralysis, adding:
“The United Nations needs to fulfil its role as a builder of a world with greater solidarity, fraternity and fairness, but it can do so only if its members have the courage to proclaim their discontent at inequality”, (ibid.)
The quintessence of those statements by four eminent persons clearly shows that the inequality throughout the world is deliberate. Otherwise, we would be able, with a modicum of courage and political will, if not to eradicate it, at least to minimize it. Indeed, every year we hear a multiplicity of speeches, as well as promises and commitments. But the proof of the dissonance between rhetoric and facts on these issues relating to Charter principles, including justice, equality, dignity, integrity, self-determination, the sovereignty of States, the inviolability of territory and respect for international law lies in what is happening in Libya; in the Sahel, especially the Niger; and the crisis between Russia and Ukraine. 
First, in Libya, thousands of people lost their lives in the catastrophic flooding there. To assuage their consciences, every nation rushed to offer its condolences and solidarity. That was, of course, to give the impression that we are living in society and that there are values that we defend. Intellectual honesty requires and the history of our consciences tells us that we should sincerely apologize to the Libyan people for having — collectively and individually, whether through reprehensible passivity or active complicity — sided with the butchers who caused the first man-made disaster in Libya.
It was that disaster that brought Libya to its knees by looting it and killing its leader, before the flooding plunged it into even deeper sorrow. Unfortunately, that human disaster was spearheaded by the United Nations under resolution 1970 (2011) and enabled by the guilty silence, if not complicity, of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union. That macabre intervention, led by Nicolas Sarkozy’s France, killed the Libyan leader. Colonel Muammar Al-Qadhafi, on 20 October 2011. If condolences to the Libyan people had a modicum of common sense and were not hypocritical, that murderous diplomacy would never have taken place around the case of the Niger to create a second Libya there.
Next, as proof that international relations are tinged with a high level of diplomatic hypocrisy, devoid of conscience, morality, dignity, integrity, justice and, hence, peace, there is still same posturing in an outrageously deadly line-up swarming around like wild beasts to devour its wounded prey.
Today we have come to the unfortunate realization that, contrary to the addresses made in good faith from this United Nations rostrum, calling for respect for the United Nations Charter and international law, the leaders representing the brotherly people of the Niger have been virtually barred from access to Headquarters. Burkina Faso strongly condemns that despicable tactic, which is based on practices that belong to the past. That can clearly be done only by minds that have lost the values vital to any harmonious life in society. We therefore stress that the United Nations must never be a tool in the hands of any country.
The pan-Africanist leaders who fought for African unity, our grandparents who fell with dignity under the murderous bullets of the colonialists and worthy African sons who sacrificed themselves for the honour on the continent and fought hard against the slave trade and neo-colonialism, had their warrior’s slumber disturbed to hear that a handful of Africa’s lost children are holding the Niger like cottonwool for the invader to set on fire. Yes. I say to the dear African continent that a handful of its children decided to humiliate and vilify it through shameless State lies, starting with the Niger. I therefore launch a heartfelt and fervent appeal to the Senegalese. Beninese. Nigerian. Ghanaian. Chadian. Ivorian. Comorian. Bissau-Guinean and all African peoples to rally together in African brotherhood and solidarity to prevent the imperialists from igniting the Niger, as they did to Libya.
From this United Nations rostrum and before the whole world. I urge that ECOWAS, the African Union and the United Nations urgently transform into genuine organizations of peoples instead of bodies of a minority of Heads of State. They must not be used and exploited to destabilize brother countries by assassinating their leaders. Only then will the United Nations Charter and international law have any meaning.
Lastly, speaking of the United Nations Charter and international law, a conflict between Russia and Ukraine is being fomented and nurtured by certain Powers. Several Western countries, in particular the United States and those of the European Union, have therefore poured in all kinds of support, especially military. Ukrainian civilians, engaged as volunteers, some of whom even drive tanks, are congratulated and called patriots. Mali, the Niger and Burkina Faso are facing a war imposed on them by imperialism under the guise of terrorists of all stripes, spreading terror and desolation.
Despite the existence of that same United Nations Charter, with its principles of equality and justice, on the one hand, and, on the one hand, the very international law invoked at this United Nations rostrum, there is clearly an abysmal divide in the way in which such issues are dealt with. Taking the case of Burkina Faso, the civilian population, faced with barbaric and murderous incursions by terrorists, decided to join forces with the defence and security forces. Such people thus engaged, trained and supervised by the defence and security forces, are called Volunteers for the Defence of the Homeland.
In Burkina Faso, we have 58.000 such volunteers, including 42.000 communal volunteers and 16.000 national volunteers, fighting on all fronts alongside the 
defence and security forces, trained, supervised and guided by them. They act only under the instruction and supervision of the defence and security forces, in accordance with regulations to protect their lives and property. Certain ECOWAS and African Union Heads of State, at the instigation of capitalist imperialist Powers, are trying to make the international community believe that those patriots are militias. That is the shameless State lie. If the international community were honest and sincere in its commitment to combating terrorism, civilian populations would not continue to become involved and train to defend themselves. Speaking of a lack of openness on the part of that international community, here are some examples.
First, when Mali. Burkina Faso, the Niger and other countries organized themselves along their common borders by pooling their forces to confront terrorism. France came out of nowhere to impose its device, that is, the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). Today ECOWAS, which suddenly has an intervention force to restore democracies, has announced a contribution of $2 billion. But, since the establishment of the G-5 Sahel to the present day and its own evaporation. ECOWAS has contributed only $25 million. Where, then, is the seriousness in the defence of human life advocated by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights?
Secondly. Burkina Faso has suffered punitive sanctions following the coup d’etat of 30 September 2022. That shady so-called international community, led by France through its local henchmen in Africa, first tried in vain to have a Prime Minister appointed in Burkina Faso. Then, it proceeded, to no avail, to impose ministers in strategic positions within the Burkinabe Government. Finally, it negotiated the maintenance of relations so that Captain Ibrahim Traore would implement whatever it decided, as a sine qua non condition for remaining in power for as long as desirable. Having also refused, in the name of his people’s best interests, an onslaught of repressive measures, threats and attempted coups d’etat, unethical schemes are being devised in criminal workshops. Unfortunately, all those schemes and grisly operations are steered by puppets controlled remotely by figures from African presidential corridors. That is why even the famous Accra Initiative did not last long without Mali.
Thirdly, in addition to the cuts in aid and the cancellation of training agreements for our defence and security forces, we are witnessing the blocking of our military equipment ordered through the hard-earned sweat of our compatriots, again at the behest of France. For example, for the airborne delivery systems needed to control and defend our country, we had a contract with Brazil, for which the weapons licence was to come from Belgium and the guidance and firing system and cameras from the United States of America, and then an engine from Canada. Today those resources are disingenuously and viciously blocked. At this United Nations rostrum, people speak of defending human rights. I therefore urge that our weapons be immediately delivered to defend and protect our battered populations. In any case, they are formally seized of the matter and, if nothing is done, history will hold them responsible for failing to assist people at risk.
Does that bleak picture of the international community, characterized by failing to assist a State in the grip of terrorism, international hypocrisy, the dominance of some Powers within the United Nations, complicity in the plundering of Africa, et cetera, not call for the international community to be brought before the International Criminal Court? In a word, our security will first and foremost be ensured by ourselves, not by anyone else.
On the issue of the Wagner Group’s presence in Burkina Faso, which is raised by some media controlled remotely by the Ely see Palace. I would like to say the following. Yes, we are the Wagner Group of Burkina Faso. Yes, those brave defence and security forces and the Volunteers for the Defence of the Homeland are the Wagner Group of Burkina Faso. From this United Nations rostrum. I therefore applaud the sacrifice of every patriot in the name of the national interest. I pay tribute to the memory of all those who fell with their weapons in their hands. And I commend the courage and integrity of those who are still alive and relentlessly and selflessly charging towards the victory of our people and the protection of our homeland.
Instead of helping us to halt that human bloodletting, we are met with spurious accusations and shameless State lies, shrouded in hypocritical diplomacy and veiled threats, telling us which partners to go to and what to do. We say no.
In the name of the same United Nations Charter and international law to which everyone here at this rostrum refers, the African peoples in general and the Sahelian peoples in particular are resolutely committed to absolutely and fully embracing their total emancipation in order to achieve genuine social progress. Burkina 
Faso will therefore enter into sovereign partnerships with whomever it wishes and buy its defence equipment from whomever it chooses. Whether the country is called Russia. Iran. Turkey. Azerbaijan. Cuba. Nicaragua or North Korea. Burkina Faso will freely buy and sell its products there, without any intermediary, let alone authorization from whomsoever, come what may.
Still talking about hypocrisy and State lies, regarding the fight against terrorism in general and in the Sahel in particular, here are some other facts of which I am sure Member States are aware.
First, in the Sahel we have almost 10.000 soldiers from foreign armies, mostly French soldiers, but also American. German and Italian soldiers, et cetera, with some of the world’s most sophisticated weapons and flight and surveillance equipment, yet no one see columns of hundreds of terrorists moving in to spread desolation and death, often with unimaginable weapons.
In Mali, the Niger and Burkina Faso, there is no arms or munitions factory, so who recruits those terrorists? Who trains them? Who continues to equip them? Who feeds them and with what means? Do you believe in such philanthropy, in the name of which Westerners are going to send their soldiers to the Sahel to die for the good of the Sahelians? If so, what justifies the annoyance and other puerile diplomatic posturing as soon as France is told to pull out militarily?
The real reason is the underground resources in the Sahel. The French National Assembly adopted Law No. 057-27 of 10 January 1957, published in the Journal officiel de la Repiibliqiie francaise of 12 January 1957, establishing the Common Organization of the Saharan Regions, which brings together parts of Mali. Burkina Faso, the Niger. Mauritania. Algeria, et cetera. That area has no equal in the world in terms of subsoil wealth. By way of example, the largest water table stretches from Mauritania to Somalia, passing through Mali. Algeria. Libya, the Niger, et cetera. The newspaper Le Monde of 23 July 1957 put forward the figure of 6 to 7 million tons of oil as the potential annual production of the Sahara. In addition to those natural resources, we have uranium, gold, cobalt, zinc, diamonds, lithium, copper and so on.
If Westerners are so fond of the Sahel that they bring their soldiers there to die in the name of democracy, freedom, human rights and peace, why is it that the entire African continent — which has 1.3 billion inhabitants, making it the second most populous continent, with 30.415.873 square kilometres and 54 States — has no permanent seat on the Security Council with a right of veto? Is not that more than a State crime? It is a United Nations crime. Let us therefore stop the blatant diplomatic lie that those imperialist Powers come to the Sahel to defend democracy and human rights. Speaking of human rights. I recall that the first charter in the world on the issue of human rights was the Kouroukan Fouga Charter of 1236 in Mande, now Mali. So let the expansionist moralists keep their rhetoric of respect for all kinds of human rights for the terrorists whom they support.
Secondly. Africa does not like to compare the dead. It would be ill-mannered to do so. Consequently. I respectfully pay tribute to the memory of people of all nationalities who lost their lives in Africa in general and in the Sahel in particular. Thus, regarding the rash, condescending and unfortunate outbursts by President Emmanuel Macron, which often verge on the ridiculous, while glorifying in a conjectural scorn for the people of Africa. I feel it my duty to give him a little history lesson on his own history. That is why classrooms are designed — for children to learn their lessons and grow up well rather than indulging in something else and risk being lost forever. But, to start with. I would like to point out that no African people has ever been against the French people. There is therefore no anti-French sentiment in Africa, and there never will be, because of our legendary hospitality and love of others. The fact is that the people of Africa condemn condescension, arrogance, insolence, smugness, paternalism, the plundering of its resources and organized crime.
For the record. I would first like to remind Mr. Emmanuel Macron of the appeal to Africa made by his own elder. General De Gaulle, on 14 June 1940 over the British Broadcasting Corporation in England to come and save France from the clutches of the Nazis. As a reminder, we have 17.000 Malians who died during the two world wars in a blood debt that France seems to have concealed. For those who wish, they need only to see the book by Bakari Kamian. Associate Professor at the Sorbonne University. In addition, in that same text, on page 344, in table 21, entitled “Sudanese veterans of the two wars”, it lists a total of 82.208 fallen combatants from Mali. Burkina Faso and the Niger, and there were 154.519 combatants from French West Africa mobilized — compare the source Henri Liger’s end-of-mission report in French West Africa. Dakar. 
13 July 1950. Senegal archives, reference 4D68 (89), see annex 5.
Then, on 17 November 1986. Francois Mitterrand, the French President at the time, in response to Captain Thomas Sankara, said:
“Africa has been plundered. I spoke of raw materials. I should have spoken of people. For centuries, we exploited you as human beings; we stole your men, your women, your children. We used you. I understand your refusal, your revolt, and I approve of your struggle. You are right to refuse to be a sacrificed continent. The time has come when you yourselves must develop your economies on the basis of its goods and its people. And the duty of the countries that have improperly profited from African labour is to return to Africa a share of what has been taken over the past centuries”.
It is true that Africa has always been heavily plundered, but it remains rich in people, assets and mineral wealth. By way of proof, in terms of its mineral resources. Africa has 30 per cent of the world’s mineral reserves. 40 per cent of gold reserves. 33 per cent of diamond reserves. 80 per cent of coltan reserves. 60 per cent of cobalt reserves. 55 per cent of uranium reserves, and so on. Africa’s youth is standing up for itself now more than ever before in strong support of that Africa. I ask Mr. Macron if he still needs a bit of history to remind him?
Lastly, long before that regrettable, and therefore unfortunate, exit by French President Emmanuel Macron, like so many of his fellow politicians, he had attacked African motherhood. In that regard too. I would like to remind him that Germany has a population of approximately 83 million over an area of 347.000 square km, as compared to the Congo, which has 95 million inhabitants on a surface area of 2.345.000 square km. Secondly. Belgium has 11 million inhabitants on a surface area of 30.000 square km, as compared to Gabon, which has 2.5 million inhabitants in an area of 267.000 square km. Thirdly. France has 68 million inhabitants on 672.329 square km, as compared to Namibia, which has 2.5 million inhabitants in an area of 825.000 square km.
In view of all that I just mentioned. Aime Cesaire, peace be with him, said:
“Africa is the only continent in the world where the people sing, dance and applaud for those who impoverish, starve and torture them. The misfortune of Africa is to have met France”.
While it is true that the West has raped, violated and robbed Africa, what is our share of the blame? As African leaders, what is our share of responsibility? Are not we, as African leaders, the ones who give in to being trampled underfoot? Indeed, we have surrendered our identity to be nothing. Our names have disappeared to make way for other imported names that do not fit our realities. We need to reclaim our culture. We have copied the West in monogamy, and now they want us to believe that contrary values and unnatural attitudes are a matter of freedom. There will be no question of homosexuality in Africa. I reiterate that there will be no question of homosexuality among us.
What has just been described are the deeply unfortunate labels of a United Nations that today can be summed up as follows, since there are 1.2 billion people plunged into poverty. $2,000 billion spent on armaments and 20 times the United Nations budget spent on nuclear. With regard to development. Africa receives $34 billion from the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, as compared to $160 billion for the West. It is reduced to the paralysis of the Security Council, the paralysis of the World Trade Organization and the rise in tensions following geostrategic repositioning. The World Trade Organization is also still blocked. The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank operate like true usurers. The World Health Organization is increasingly dominated by profitable pharmaceutical firms, giving commercial, rather than social, priority to vaccines, such as the coronavirus disease vaccine. The United Nations is increasingly becoming a shadow of its former self as a result of attempts to hijack it by a group of imperialist international Powers, thereby blurring the clarity and seriousness of its decision-making, and so on.
Consequently, the peoples of Africa in general, and those of the Sahel in particular, will resolutely fight to ensure that ECOWAS, the African Union and the United Nations are institutions genuinely at the service of the peoples of the world for their complete emancipation and genuine social progress. Because it is the shortcomings of those organizations, their lack of sincerity, their cronyism and arbitrary decisions, the cover-up of constitutional tampering with its attendant crimes, the promotion of poor governance, looting, social disorder and corruption that inevitably lead to coups d’etat, which are hence simply consequences. Let us therefore 
deal with the root causes, and the consequences will disappear of their own accord. However, if we continue with that ostrich game of hypocritical diplomacy to shameless State lies, organized crime, constitutional tampering and the creation of lackeys at the head of our African States, even the United Nations may not escape a coup d’etat. Do not say that it was not warned.
In that regard, in order to take their destiny into their own hands. Mali, the Niger and Burkina Faso signed the Alliance of Sahel States (ASS). The ASS is a framework for securing our countries, based on the revised treaty on the Authority for the Integrated Development of the Liptako-Gourma Region. Taking into account the security situation and, above all, the lack of openness in partnerships, we need to rely on our own means by seeking to pool our resources and working to eradicate gaps in operational areas. In a loud and firm voice. I plainly and forcefully say the following.
First, we African peoples are essentially democratic. As proof, our commitment to human dignity transcends democracy. What we reject is therefore not so much democracy as the trap of democracy that is set for us. Electoral democracy has thus proved to be a means of controlling our States through the game of musical chairs played by leaders who are often imposters, the corrupt, thieves and Constitution violators, because they have no regard for the only true interest of our African States.
Secondly, are we Africans recognized today for our dignity as humans in the sense that one person is equal to another? The answer is definitely, over and above the particular convenience of putting us to sleep and better enslaving us. It is a sad day for the dark continent, scientifically recognized as the cradle of humankind, but in reality humiliated and placed under control and domination. From bogus independence to fratricidal wars, from electoral democracy to biased aid, from wars of plunder to terrorism, maliciously fabricated, maintained and fed into our African countries, in particular Mali. Burkina Faso and the Niger, a single conclusion can be drawn — that it is to dominate us and keep the foot on our neck, as in the case of our unfortunate brother. George Floyd, right here in the United States. Is that democracy? There are supporters of that narrow view of freedom who intellectually justify the enslavement of, and barbarism against, our peoples in the struggle for their dignity and sovereignty in the name of a paradoxical principle of freedom that ultimately kills freedom. Oh freedom, what crimes have been committed in your name.
That is why we have now decided to say no to all those friends who wish us well to the point of threatening us with war in order to impose their friendship. We will adapt that democracy, so brandished and vaunted by wolves in sheep’s clothing, in order to develop the right political leadership for our peoples on our own with a view to their happiness. Yes, complete emancipation and genuine social progress for our peoples are the ultimate goal of any action, be it political, economic, sociocultural or security-related.
Thirdly, the African peoples in general and those of the Sahel in particular have discovered the shackles of economic, security and sociocultural enslavement, embodied in secret agreements with France, and are committed to breaking them for their true emancipation. Such shackles include, first, colonial debt, to which we are not going to close our eyes and pay while leaving our people to die of hunger, thirst and even disease. Secondly, there is the issue of currency, specifically the franc of the French African colonies, the CFA franc, which is not African property. In legal terms, property means the right to enjoy and dispose of things in the most absolute manner — see article 544 of the French Civil Code on the issue. France therefore holds a patent on the CFA franc. As a result, it owns the CFA franc and lends it out to the French-speaking African States. Moreover, the funny thing is that the banknotes issued by France for West Africa differ from those for Central Africa in monetary value under the same name of the CFA franc. The only document recognizing the CFA franc is Decree No. 45-0136 of 25 December 1945, signed by Charles de Gaulle. President of the Provisional Government of the French Republic. Rene Pleven. Minister for Finance, and Jacques Soustelle. Minister of the Colonies. Thirdly, the priority given to French interests and companies in public contracts and calls for tender is over. Fourthly, the exclusive right to supply military equipment and to train military officers in the colonies is also over, and so on.
Fourthly, no one welcomes a coup d’etat, but, if we ignore the fact that such coups d’etat are often the consequence of poor governance and constitutional tampering in order to gain additional mandates, there will always be coups d’etat. Let us therefore have the clear-sightedness to fight the real causes by continuing to demand respect for democratic rules and good governance. 
Fifthly, the people of Africa are not against the French people. Rather, they are against French policies, which are full of condescension. By refusing to recall its ambassador to the Niger. France is violating international law, in particular article 9, paragraphs 1 and 2, of the 1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations. The decision to ban performers from Burkina Faso. Mali and the Niger in France shows a very serious misunderstanding of the importance of culture as a driving force for family, community and even national stability. Performers are physicians of the mind, even at a distance. As they have declared that they do not want unemployed people, migrants, thieves, et cetera, in France, we in Africa in general and in the Sahel in particular do not want the manufacturers of the unemployed and thieves through the cynical plundering of our resources. 
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the peoples of the world and to all figures at all levels in the world who understand and support Burkina Faso. Mali and the Niger in the difficult, but worthy ascent on the road to full emancipation — the affirmation of dignity, honour, freedom, equality, prosperity, justice and therefore peace.
In response to the current situation in Burkina Faso, the Government has taken resolute action by adopting a new development plan, the action plan for stabilization and development, and its four priorities: first, the fight against terrorism and restoring territorial integrity; secondly, response to the humanitarian crisis; thirdly. State-rebuilding and improving governance; and, lastly, national reconciliation and social cohesion. Such efforts seek to provide the Burkinabe people with better living conditions. While we salute all our partners around the world who work with us, we strongly advise those who are still in doubt or are stunned by false reports that they are welcome in Burkina Faso, provided that the partnership is in line with the transition vision summarized in those four pillars.
Long live the United Nations. Long live the seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly. Long live peoples in struggle. Long live solidarity among peoples. Long live a free Africa. Long live the Alliance of Sahel States. Long live Burkina Faso. Homeland or death, we shall overcome.
