I am deeply honoured to address the Assembly. I believe that our commitment will lead us to the answers of the pressing challenges that humankind is facing today.
Today we live in a world of increasing risks and uncertainty. The resurrected ghost of self-destruction, as a result of the full-scale war in Europe, is a nightmare that my generation wrongly believed to be a bygone phase in human history. War, conflicts and terror challenge the future of our civilization. So do the higher level of socioeconomic distress, the growing food insecurity, the disruption of supply chains and the rise of inflation rates which started during the coronavirus disease disaster. After the weakening of the pandemic, the hopes for rearranging the broken societal and economic links brought some optimism, but then the war in Ukraine erupted. It exacerbated crises of various kinds and destroyed not only thousands of human lives. 
but also the optimism that we would be able to build back better.
The systematic erosion of democracy and human rights and the rise of authoritarianism are completing the picture. The consensus that humankind may live according to the rules of an internationally adopted world order is blatantly violated. Those rules, which have been forged in this green marble United Nations Hall, are now vehemently contested. All those negative developments are about to distract our attention from the challenges that may turn out to be equally deadly for humankind. The triple planetary crisis of climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution threatens life on our planet. All those risks and challenges must be addressed with full consciousness of the fact that the future of our civilization is at stake.
The first mission that leaders must see as their historical vocation at this crossroads for humankind is to rebuild trust in multilateralism and to uphold the rules-based international order, which must serve the firm will of all peoples to live in peace. That is the fundamental precondition for survival and for embarking on the path of building prosperity. Restoring peace and security is our most pressing priority.
Nineteen months ago, a permanent member of the Security Council unleashed a war of aggression against its neighbouring country, violating the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law. From day one. Bulgaria has strongly condemned the aggression of the Russian Federation against Ukraine. Every day of this war threatens global peace and security. Moreover, it has turned into a war of attrition, challenging economic and social development worldwide.
The latest events show an increasing risk of spillover in the Black Sea region, affecting countries neighbouring Ukraine. An important priority of the seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly should be to find modalities that could pave a way towards restoring peace in Ukraine. What we need is stronger political will, diplomacy and active talks about comprehensive, just and sustainable peace, based on the internationally recognized United Nations Charter.
Bulgaria is deeply concerned about the decision of the Russian Federation to withdraw from the Black Sea Grain Initiative. The bombing of the Ukrainian harbour infrastructure and the restriction of navigation in the Black Sea leads to further global food insecurity, especially in the Global South, where the price of the war is particularly high.
The maintenance of international peace and security faces challenges all over the world. The attention is now turned towards Ukraine because that conflict has a growing potential to turn into a global disaster. We are deeply concerned about the potential victims of each and every war and conflict. Human lives are equally precious all around the globe.
The Middle East and the use of violence in the Israel-Palestine conflict are a source of great concern. We call on all parties to refrain from the use of force and to resume direct negotiations leading to a fair and sustainable two-State solution.
The political solution to the ongoing conflict in Syria marks the only way ahead. Bulgaria maintains its unwavering position in support of the unity and sovereignty of Yemen. We support the international efforts for peaceful solutions and humanitarian assistance for the entire region.
On Afghanistan, we emphasize the importance of preventing terrorist threats and irregular migration. We strongly condemn the Taliban’s actions, exacerbating the human rights situation, especially of women and girls, ethnic and religious minorities and human rights defenders.
My country is a strong supporter of the European path of the Western Balkan countries as the most effective way for stabilizing the region. Good neighbourly relations, comprehensive reforms and the fulfilment of accession criteria are the core of integration process.
Bulgaria is a staunch supporter of further strengthening the global nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation architecture. We call for dialogue among nuclear-weapon States on confidence-building. Russia’s suspension of its participation in the New START Treaty is a cause for great concern. Its intention to deploy nuclear weapons in Belarus undermines the strategic stability and the overall security architecture. We call on Russia to prove its commitment to the 3 January 2022 joint statement on preventing nuclear war and avoiding arms races. We call on Iran to return to its obligations under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, and on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to stop challenging international non-proliferation agreements. 
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) Summit is a vital opportunity to get the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development back on track. Access to financing and strong partnerships between the United Nations and international financial institutions is key to achieving sustainable development. Bulgaria is actively engaged in focusing their activities on effective financial support for all countries in need.
The Global Digital Compact should harness the potential of digital technologies to accelerate the achievement of the SDGs. Our digital future and artificial intelligence should be guided by a human- centred approach based on human rights, democracy and the rule of law.
Bulgaria welcomes the adoption of political declarations at the three health summits during this high-level Week. Those documents of high-political commitment will foster the One Health approach, thus contributing to the strength of national health systems and the global health architecture.
The coronavirus disease pandemic resulted in a setback in the realization of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, especially with regard to education. We support the vision of the Secretary- General for the creation of learning societies, for recognizing education and lifelong learning as a public good, and we stand ready to deliver on the commitments made at the 2022 Transforming Education Summit.
During these days, we have spoken a lot about peace among nations, but we also need to make peace with nature. Climate change is a threat multiplier and mitigating it is essential. Decisive climate action is a pressing global imperative and a test for the ability of the multilateral system to respond.
Urgent action is crucial to halt and reverse biodiversity loss. Bulgaria welcomes the recently established Global Biodiversity Framework Fund and the adoption of the agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. Sustainable water management is critical to the achievement of the entire 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
This year we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. This remarkable document is a powerful enabler of equality, fundamental freedoms and justice. Bulgaria remains a firm supporter of the mandate of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and of the United Nations human rights system at large. Strongly committed to further advancing the human rights agenda worldwide, my country has presented its candidature to the Human Rights Council for the 2024-2026 period and will strive to ensure its wide support and successful implementation.
As co-Chair of the Group of Friends on Children and Armed Conflict. Bulgaria consistently advocates for the rights of the child, an issue that ranks high among our priorities as member of the Executive Boards of UNICEF and UN-Women. Investing in children’s health, nutrition, education and protection from violence is crucial for responding to the basic principle of leaving no one behind of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
My country consistently emphasizes issues such as gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls, promoting the rights of people with disabilities and fighting against discrimination and hate speech. This year Bulgaria also commemorated the eightieth anniversary of the rescue of the entire Jewish population of my country, amounting to 50.000 people during the Second World War. That remarkable episode of our modern history inspires us to continue efforts to affirm tolerance and understanding as core values of modern democracy.
Taking into account the increasing challenges to the fundamental principles enshrined in the United Nations Charter. Bulgaria welcomes efforts to increase the transparency and accountability of the Security Council and is a co-sponsor of landmark resolution 76/262, on the use of the veto. While the veto initiative has further empowered the General Assembly, genuine reform of the Security Council remains a difficult and sensitive issue. Bulgaria would like to see the Council be more effective in carrying out its primary responsibility. Allocating at least one additional non-permanent seat to the Group of Eastern European States in a future reformed Security Council remains a priority for us.
