I join previous speakers in extending my sincere congratulations to Mr. Francis on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session. He can count on my delegation’s full support as he steers the work of this body. I could not agree more with him that the multilateral system needs to rebuild trust and reignite global solidarity to accelerate action on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in order to realize peace, prosperity, progress and sustainability.
As we convene this week, the world is in the age of a polycrisis, facing a plethora of persisting global challenges, among them the war in Ukraine, its associated geopolitical tensions, the impact on the global economy, the challenges related to climate change and the lingering effects of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Of critical importance is the distressing reality that the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and its Sustainable Development Goals is off-track. According to The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2023: Special Edition, half of the targets of the SDGs are experiencing inadequate progress, while 30 per cent of the targets have come to a halt. The lack of progress is exacerbated by the multifaceted global crisis compounding the already dire situation in which we find ourselves.
Illustratively, whereas SDG 5 expresses the need for gender equality and the empowerment of women and girls and picks representation in positions of power and leadership as one of the indicators, the United Nations has not done badly in that regard except for the Secretary-General position. Would participants not agree with me that now is the time to have a female Secretary-General?
The gravity of the challenges faced by the SDGs demands that we transcend the business-as-usual approach to addressing them. That will require a robust political commitment from all of us. It is therefore imperative for the United Nations system, international financiers, the private sector and civil society to forge a collective front and refocus our efforts to swiftly propel the SDGs back on track. To that end, the recent Sustainable Development Goals Summit and its Political Declaration could not have come at a better time.
Over the past few years, we have witnessed, and continue to endure, the profound and devastating impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. The consequences have been felt across nations, but the extent of its devastation has greatly varied depending on factors such as the level of development and the geographical location. Whether one resides in the global South or North, a landlocked developing country (LLDC) or a small island developing State, those distinctions have played a crucial role in determining the severity of the pandemic’s effects. It is therefore imperative that we wholeheartedly embrace the ongoing discussions regarding pandemic prevention, preparedness and response.
Botswana’s key priority in such discussions is to ensure an international instrument that addresses equity during a pandemic. To that end, the main issues to be addressed from that perspective include timely and equitable access and the sharing of benefits; the strengthening of regulations to ensure that developed countries and those with resources do not hoard medical products during a pandemic; building capacity for stronger health systems; investment in research and development to build up the local and regional manufacturing of vaccines, including the sharing of intellectual property; and establishing sustainable, predictable and flexible financing mechanisms. 
I am pleased to inform the General Assembly that Botswana is making its contribution to building capacity to manufacture vaccines for both humans and animals. We have made remarkable progress in terms of HIV diagnosis and, on 28 August, our National HIV Reference Laboratory was designated a World Health Organization collaborating centre of excellence. That epitomized, in part, the crowning of our National Laboratory’s competence and success in carrying out genomic sequencing at levels equivalent to those of the best, as demonstrated by being the first to discover the Omicron variant.
By the time that such discussions reach their conclusion, it is essential that we establish robust systems that leave no room for the repetition of such a calamity, ensuring that the survival and well-being of our people are never again contingent upon their location in the global South or North. More important, our hope is that the resultant of the discussions will culminate in a treaty.
Climate change remains an urgent and critical challenge of our time, posing a huge threat to the existence of our planet. It is alarming that the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change recently reported record-high global greenhouse-gas emissions, which are at the highest level and which continue to surge.
To effectively address climate change, it is crucial that we prioritize international cooperation and partnerships. Such a global effort requires a comprehensive approach that goes beyond reducing emissions, encompassing various aspects of our lives, be it energy production, agriculture, transportation or industry.
Our efforts must also include accelerating the uptake of renewable energy sources and investing in clean technologies. That necessitates sufficient funding to support mitigation and adaptation, particularly for developing countries. In that context, we endorse the appeal for developed countries to fulfil their pledge to provide $100 billion annually in climate financing to developing countries. That also includes fully replenishing the Green Climate Fund.
My Government welcomes the Secretary-General’s Acceleration Agenda, which urges the fast-tracking of climate action in all countries and sectors. It is imperative that both developed and developing countries comply with their targets. As for Botswana, we reaffirm our commitment to achieving a 15 per cent reduction in carbon emissions by 2030.
It has been more than a year since the beginning of the Russia-Ukraine war. The war’s destructive consequences have been experienced not only in the region but also globally, as the international economy has suffered from the food and energy crisis. Botswana strongly urges an immediate cessation of hostilities and advocates for a diplomatic resolution to the conflict. In that regard. Botswana welcomes the recent engagement among African. Russian and Ukrainian leaders, and we hope that such efforts, along with similar initiatives elsewhere, will encourage the conflicting parties to return to the negotiation table.
While we work on resolving active conflicts, we must step up action in mitigating all threats to international peace and security by reaffirming and observing the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, international law and other obligations. That also includes a commitment to obligations concerning, among other things, nuclear disarmament, nuclear non-proliferation, arms control and weapons of mass destruction.
Botswana shares a deep concern regarding the persistent conflicts and destabilization of legitimate Governments across the African continent. The negation of constitutionalism, as evidenced by overthrows of Governments, which seem to be having a contagion effect, should be shunned with the greatest disdain. Equally, the deprivation of people from self- determination, albeit repugnant, continues unabated.
It is of the utmost importance that the Secretary- General collaborate closely with the African Union and subregional organizations to prioritize and actively engage to foster peace and stability in Africa. I firmly believe that the attainment of lasting peace in Africa can pave the way for a more prosperous and harmonious continent, where the aspirations and well-being of African people can thrive.
Next year marks the conclusion of the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade 2014-2024, followed by the third United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries, scheduled to be held in Kigali in June 2024. The challenges faced by LLDCs have 
been extensively documented, and the ongoing global crises have inflicted severe damage on their economies. Unfortunately, the progress achieved in implementing the Vienna Programme of Action has been eroded by such crises, resulting in persistently high poverty levels in LLDCs, which averaged 23 per cent as of 2022. Those countries continue to suffer from marginalization in global trade due to exorbitant trade costs, underscoring the urgent need for infrastructure development and maintenance to address geographical and structural obstacles and capitalize on their untapped potential.
The forthcoming programme presents a valuable opportunity to rally greater global support and foster multi-stakeholder partnerships. Consequently, we must prioritize the formulation of new and tangible priorities aimed at bolstering infrastructure in LLDCs, with a particular emphasis on the transit transportation, information and communication technology and energy sectors. I therefore urge the Secretary- General, development partners, international financial institutions, the private sector and civil society to unite in support of the upcoming conference. It is essential that we not only strive for its success, but also forge a new programme of action that is attuned to the pressing challenges confronting LLDCs. That comprehensive programme must provide the necessary tools and resources to enable such countries to attain their SDG objectives.
To conclude. I want to re-emphasize that merely acknowledging global problems without taking substantive measures will not solve them. We require greater action. The time for urgent action to revitalize the United Nations system, ensuring that it is fit for purpose, is now.