The era we are traversing has been marked by a series of crises and proliferating major conflicts in a world full of tensions. While the challenges we face are formidable, it is our mindset and our attitude in facing them that are now extremely important and decisive. Are we ready to do everything we can to try to improve the situation? In any case, it is clear that we must. Together, we must combat these crises — the climate crisis, wars, social conflict and growing inequalities, as well as the weakening of democratic institutions and the erosion of the multilateral structures that enable us to connect at the international level. It would seem that that everywhere — or almost everywhere — protectionism, a kind of withdrawal and selfishness are on the rise, even though we are all aware that withdrawal, threats and violence have never solved global issues and inequalities. It is true. We all see it. We are experiencing a global crisis, probably the biggest since the end of the Second World War.
In launching an aggressive war against Ukraine, the Russian Federation has not only attacked a peaceful country, but it has also attacked international law and our multilateral structures. What is strange is that this aggression is the work of a permanent member of the Security Council, which, according to the Charter of the United Nations, has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. Today we should recall the essential principles enshrined in the Charter and ensure that we fulfil the mandate entrusted to us in that regard.
What we also know in these situations is that it is the poorest and most fragile States and regions that would suffer the most if our confidence in the international system were to weaken. I have already mentioned the Charter of the United Nations, which is a cornerstone of public international law, and this year is the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which represents a unique opportunity to reaffirm the global consensus embodied in the Declaration and a key moment for uniting and strengthening the international community. The United Nations is the foundation of peaceful collaboration and mutual trust between States. I believe there is no way that these challenges can be overcome by isolated initiatives. Our actions must be collaborative and collective. Take the fight against inequality, for instance.
Strong multilateral institutions are essential to combating inequalities, which unfortunately always worsen during crises. Climate change exacerbates social and economic inequalities, too. And we are seeing inequalities increase exponentially — whether they are social and gender inequalities or economic disparities — not only between countries but within them. I was struck when I read again recently that over the past 20 years the income gap between the richest 10 per cent and the poorest 50 per cent has doubled. I was also struck to read again recently that inequalities are as large today as they were at the beginning of the twentieth century, before the First World War. Those inequalities have continued to have a disproportionate effect on those who are already the most vulnerable in our societies, thereby encouraging instability and populism and a loss of confidence in democracy and institutions. That fragility therefore threatens all of us, nationally and internationally.
For what is probably too long, we have believed that defending our interests and protecting the most vulnerable were two different things. Today we know that the one cannot exist without the other. And strong multilateral institutions are also essential to promoting peace. But we do have a few things that we can build on together. For instance, the Secretary-General’s New Agenda for Peace stresses the very important point that prevention is the starting point of any peace effort. Inequality of access and of opportunity in terms of food, health, employment and property leads to conflicts. We must all make every effort to ensure that everyone, in all of our countries, is able to participate fully in political, economic, social and cultural life. In that regard, internationally speaking, we must engage resolutely in combating threats, persecution and acts of violence, especially those against women — and especially people who are working to defend human rights. Young people must also have real prospects for development and prosperity.
I have spoken of inequality. I have spoken of the promotion of peace. There is also of course the key role played by multilateral institutions in the protection of civilians. All armed conflicts are different. But what they all have in common is that they increase inequality and the suffering of civilians. In that regard, strong multilateral institutions are essential. Also essential is respect for international humanitarian law, which is an 
absolute priority for Switzerland and at the heart of our efforts in the Security Council. And I want to take this opportunity to reiterate that the protection of civilians in armed conflict is not an option but an obligation for all the parties to a conflict.
Over the past year I have had several opportunities to visit countries that have been marked by conflict, notably Mozambique, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Colombia. Those contacts with conflict- affected populations have served as a reminder of how essential it is to address the root causes of conflicts if we are to ensure lasting peace. I was also able to observe first-hand how important the full participation of women is to any return to peace. For that reason. Switzerland remains committed to implementing the agenda on women and peace and security and will continue to actively work for the full implementation of the relevant resolutions.
During armed conflicts, the lack of essential goods and services for the civilian population often claims more lives than the direct impact of the hostilities. It exacerbates inequalities and undermines the return to peace. In that context. I would like to take this opportunity to stress the importance of the United Nations peacekeeping missions, which are doing indispensable work for the populations that are most affected. In that regard. I also believe that all humanitarian actors, including those in United Nations missions on the ground and other actors, must be protected and supported. In that context, the work of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) must also be strongly defended. Owing to the growing number of crises, our Organization is dealing with an unprecedented and worrisome increase in needs. As the depositary of the Geneva Conventions and the headquarters of the ICRC. Switzerland is firmly committed to meeting that humanitarian imperative. The work of the ICRC is fundamental to the protection of civilians.
Today I have mentioned some of the factors in the clearly immense challenges we are facing. We must be clear about where our collective interests lie — and that is certainly not in the disorder that the world is witnessing and that some are hoping to intensify for their own benefit. On the contrary, our collective interests lie in a renewed world order that can guarantee stability, trust and prospects for all. And it is precisely for that reason that we must take a stand and commit to keeping international cooperation alive. The United Nations did not come out of nowhere. It embodies the institutionalized hope for a better world. It is an arguably idealistic project, born of another age of war, brutality and despair, and it rests on the belief that international cooperation is vital, that the world can be a better place only if each and every one of us shoulders our responsibilities and that ultimately what unites nations and peoples is much stronger than what divides them. Perhaps that observation can give us cause for optimism during this time marked by significant pessimism, and can encourage us to both strengthen and deepen our work together on a global scale.
The seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly offers us a unique chance and a rare opportunity to come together in a show of trust and to prepare together for the Summit of the Future in 2024 in order to strengthen cooperation on essential issues, fill the gaps in global governance and reaffirm existing commitments. That applies in particular to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Yesterday’s debates and discussions at the Sustainable Development Goals Summit were very impressive and interesting to participate in. The outcomes of the Summit should enable us to breathe new life into the 2030 Agenda, which is none other than our collective road map to a better future. Let us therefore demonstrate responsibility and solidarity with a view to building a fairer and more egalitarian world — not so much for us today but for those who will succeed us, our future generations. It really must be made clear that we need to shoulder that responsibility ourselves and that we cannot delegate it. It is our responsibility.