As we enter the second decade of the twenty-first century, humankind faces inherited challenges and new obstacles that require action. We must regard those calamities as opportunities that compel us to work together to overcome them. The Dominican Republic is firmly committed to building a model of humane, inclusive, fair and sustainable development. However, the question of whether we are really on track to achieve it is a valid one. The various crises caused by climate change have had devastating impacts on our planet and our societies, such as droughts, rising sea levels, the loss of biodiversity and extreme weather events, among other impacts. Those impacts have yielded an environmental liability that seriously imperils all the progress we have achieved in recent decades.
As a developing economy with a negative carbon footprint, we are making our contribution to climate change mitigation by encouraging the use of renewable energy. But we know that is only one step on the long road to sustainability, because we are still very dependent on fossil fuels. Oil remains important to us. I take this opportunity to draw attention to the exporting countries’ practice of controlling supply to keep crude oil prices high, to the detriment of importing countries. In the General Assembly, which is representative of all countries, we should discuss and approve a financial mechanism that guarantees the stability of crude oil prices for low-income and middle-income importing countries such as ours.
Important steps have been taken to address the climate emergency, such as the recent adoption of the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction, which I will sign this afternoon. Nevertheless, there are still many more important steps that must be taken, including the adoption of a multidimensional vulnerability index to be applied to all developing countries and the establishment of a loss and damage fund to provide financial assistance to the countries that are most vulnerable to the effects of climate change. I would also like to highlight the International Conference on Small Island Developing States, to be held in Antigua and Barbuda in May 2024, in which our country will participate as a member of the preparatory committee.
It is also urgent to create a concessional financing mechanism to enable middle-income countries to meet the challenges of achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. The lack of access to adequate resources was precisely one of the reasons that most countries failed to achieve the Millennium Development Goals. As the Secretary-General has stated, the international financial system is broken. The Dominican Republic firmly believes in a profound reform of the international financial architecture that benefits all countries in an equitable manner.
Another of the harmful effects of climate change affects our Caribbean region in particular is the massive bloom of sargassum. That algae, which devours Caribbean coasts, including those of the United States 
and Mexico, has very serious economic, social and environmental impacts, especially for tourism, which accounts for up to 75 per cent of the economies of some Caribbean countries. The Dominican Republic has created a multi-sectoral round table to deal with that problem, and we hope that developed countries will contribute to the solution.
One of the pillars of our commitment to achieve a fairer social contract and a more effective State has been, and will always be, the fight against corruption. The Dominican citizenry has assumed it as a response to one of its main demands. The various international indicators on the perception of corruption confirm the progress that my Government has made in that regard.
On another matter. I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate to the Assembly the candidacy of the Dominican Republic to the Human Rights Council elections to be held next month for the period 2024- 2026. Our candidacy represents our firm commitment to defending human rights.
When observing the island of Hispaniola from space — which can be done from a cell phone using Google Earth — a palpable and heartbreaking difference can be seen: a green and flourishing half that is the Dominican Republic, which has prioritized the conservation and sustainable management of its natural resources. The other half, devoid of that rich forest cover, reflects Haiti’s dramatically deforested landscape. That natural boundary is not only a geography lesson but also a powerful reminder of what awaits the world if we continue to ignore nature’s alarms.
Haiti today is suffering from not only an environmental tragedy but also political and social instability that could become a threat to the entire region. I am not happy to recall the call I made two years ago to the General Assembly, when I said:
“Since we took office, we have warned repeatedly that the situation in Haiti could potentially spill over its borders and lead to insecurity in the region. That is why this community of nations must urgently, once and for all, attend to the Haitian crisis as one of its highest priorities, requiring ongoing followup”. (A/76/PV.9, p.3)
Today, two years later, the harsh reality of that warning can be confirmed. A small group of Haitian private individuals has resumed construction of an illegal diversion channel in Haitian territory to extract water from the Dajabon River, in violation of border treaties between the Dominican Republic and Haiti. The international community should know that the Dajabon River originates in Loma de Cabrera and that most of its 55 kilometres run through our territory until it flows into Manzanillo Bay in Montecristi. Only two kilometres enter Haitian territory, and that small stretch on the Haitian side is where they are building the canal. The information available to us indicates that it is a gambit by a small economic and political elite to control water in order to profit from its sale to smallholder farmers in the area.
The idea for that project was never officially communicated to the Dominican Government, and no documentation was provided on its scope, environmental impact or the identity of its final beneficiaries. Despite the limited information available, the analyses we have carried out show that the project jeopardizes access to water for hundreds of Dominican and Haitian farming families downstream from where the canal is being built. In addition, the project creates a flooding hazard for the CODEVI industrial park. 300 metres downstream of the canal, and its 19.000 Haitian workers, along with some of the inhabitants of the border towns of Dajabon and Juana Mendez. And as if that were not enough, it could have harmful ecological effects on the Saladillo Lagoon, one of the main wetlands of the Dominican Republic.
Since April 2021, our Government has repeatedly requested the Haitian authorities to halt the unilateral and illegal construction of that project. The Haitian Government has itself acknowledged that it is not a Government project but has failed to stop it, owing to the institutional weakness and the crisis of public order and security in that country. The situation has already led to heightened animosity on both sides of the border. Faced with that illegal international act committed by private individuals in a part of the river that is in Haitian territory, the Dominican Government has been forced to take strong measures, including closing the border with Haiti, in order to guarantee security and the national interest, as well as to protect our rivers, environment and agricultural production. We are not having and do not desire or seek a confrontation with the Haitian people, but we do confront the uncontrollable actors who maintain insecurity in Haiti in the service of their private interests, who are now also conspiring against the stability of their Government and the security of water resources. 
Undoubtedly. Haiti’s problem is no longer in Haiti; it is in the hands of the international community. For that reason, we strongly support the responsible position expressed by the President Joe Biden of the United States yesterday from this very rostrum, a position we now repeat: the Security Council must urgently authorize the United Nations-backed security support mission. The Security Council has already adopted three important resolutions — establishing a sanctions regime, an initiative to stop the illicit flow of arms and a call for the establishment of a multinational force to assist the Haitian National Police, as requested by that country’s Government and the Secretary-General of the Organization.
We applaud Kenya’s important gesture of solidarity in leading the multinational force, and that of Jamaica and the Bahamas in contributing troops. I take this opportunity to thank in particular President William Ruto of Kenya for his solidarity and humanitarian willingness to lead, through this mission, the quest for peace and stability for the Haitian people. In addition, we hope that all countries that are considering playing a role in that commendable effort will act with determination. What is happening in Haiti is a breakdown of law and order by criminal elements, devoid of any political or ideological claims. Accepting the request for assistance from the Haitian authorities by deploying a multinational force is therefore consistent with the letter and spirit of the Charter of the United Nations and the mandate of the Organization, in accordance with international law, to ensure peace.
We are all aware that the peacemaking process in Haiti must be undertaken in conjunction with a social and political covenant. In that regard, we commend the noble efforts of the Caribbean Community Eminent Persons Group to broker a political agreement that will confer the greatest possible legitimacy to the acceptance of a multinational force and the holding of fair, free and transparent elections. In that regard. I would like to acknowledge Prime Minister Andrew Holness of Jamaica for all his efforts. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his work in addressing that crisis and to call upon him to redouble his efforts to bring about the immediate deployment of a multinational force in Haiti. We also call on the Security Council to adopt such a draft resolution now, because time has run out.
During centuries of often difficult coexistence with the Haitian people, the Dominican Republic has given clear demonstrations of tireless solidarity. Haiti is in need of a great deal. I want to reiterate our solidarity with the Haitian people, but I do so without forgetting that our main responsibility is to defend the interests of the Dominican people. That is what we have always done, it is what we are doing, and rest assured it is what we will continue to do, because there is not and never will be a Dominican solution to the Haitian problem.
Let us not wait until the next warning turns out to be the chronicle of a tragedy foretold. May this moment, at the seventy-eighth regular session of the General Assembly, mark a renaissance in our collective determination to forge a safer, more inclusive and more sustainable future for Haiti and for all. I am making a final call. This global forum challenges us to act not only as individual nations but as a united collective, with a shared vision and a common purpose. History will judge us not only by the words we utter in these hallowed halls but — more crucially — by our actions in the real world. Let us not fail the future.
