It is my honour to address the General Assembly on behalf of Ethiopia. I would also like to extend my heartfelt congratulations to Mr. Dennis Francis on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session. I assure him of my country’s full support in the performance of his duties.
We are gathered at a time when the world faces a multitude of challenges. In such times, we must ask ourselves whether we have the necessary political will to choose global partnership over geopolitical competition. Are we prepared to work together towards a promising age of shared prosperity? Are we committed to working together to save our planet and to meet the aspirations of more than 8 billion people?
The uncomfortable truth is that we are increasingly witnessing policy choices that escalate tensions, threatening the peace and stability of the world. Poverty and hunger are increasing. Progress towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is off-track, pushing even further back the objective of eliminating extreme poverty by 2030.
Global inflation and the rise in the cost of living are undermining development gains, further worsening the challenges of the most vulnerable communities. Investment in human capital and skills development remain critical for developing countries.
Climate change continues to have devastating impacts across the globe. Africa and other vulnerable regions are enduring disproportionate adverse effects. The target of mobilizing $100 billion by 2030 to support the mitigation and adaptation efforts of developing countries has not been achieved. The upcoming twenty-eighth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, to be held in the United Arab Emirates, should therefore be seized as an opportune moment to take bold actions.
The threat of nuclear weapons is another source of grave concern for humankind. The international community needs to prioritize dialogue in order to de-escalate tensions and prevent the threat of nuclear weapons. We should also ensure that new technologies such as artificial intelligence are used responsibly, in a manner that benefits humankind.
The global community can address those challenges through meaningful cooperation. The letter and spirit of the Charter of the United Nations demands that we come together to tackle those challenges with the highest sense of urgency and partnership. Ethiopia calls on all Member States to recommit to the Charter of the United Nations. Maintaining the status quo will not advance our shared interest of ensuring peace and prosperity. We should collectively work for an inclusive multilateral system to renew our global solidarity. A new global collective security system that respects the sovereignty of Member States and prevents conflict is vital. As a long-time champion of, and active participant in. United Nations-mandated peacekeeping operations across the globe. Ethiopia underscores that reforming the Security Council is not a choice but an absolute necessity. We need a reformed and representative Security Council that is fit for purpose. Allocating permanent seats to Africa, as set out in our continental Common Position, is politically and morally justified.
Ethiopia commends the efforts of the Secretary-General with regard to the financing of African Union peace support operations from assessed contributions. National ownership of security responsibilities is imperative. For peacekeeping operations to achieve their objectives, robust capacity-building support should be provided to national law enforcement structures.
Unilateral sanctions and coercive economic measures violate United Nations principles and international law. Ethiopia opposes such measures imposed on developing countries and calls for their unconditional removal. We wish to underline that 
diplomatic dialogue among sovereign nations should be the primary tool for resolving differences.
Ethiopia and other developing countries have also been advocating for the reform of the United Nations system as a whole. We call for a more inclusive and effective multilateral mechanism that works fairly for developing countries. The group comprised of Brazil. Russia. India. China and South Africa has championed that call, and that is why Ethiopia is grateful to have been invited to join the group.
While the world has the financial resources to fund all the development targets set out in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, its implementation has fallen behind. Therefore, what we need is firm political commitment and renewed global partnership. The Addis Ababa Action Agenda should also be fully implemented to meet the SDGs. Ethiopia has aligned its 10-year development plan with the SDGs. We are resolute in accelerating our inclusive political and economic reforms for a more peaceful and prosperous society. We are also committed to finding comprehensive solutions to the climate crisis. The Ethiopian-owned flagship programme — the national Green Legacy Initiative — is a demonstration of that commitment. The objective of the programme is to cultivate a green culture and ensure the country’s development through rural and urban green initiatives. The programme has been successful, and we are making every effort to share our experience.
The Pretoria peace agreement ended a two-yearlong conflict in northern Ethiopia. The agreement is a practical embodiment of African solutions to African problems. Its implementation continues to make significant progress, despite some delays in the execution of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process. There is a need to expedite the process and ensure its successful completion. The continued implementation of the agreement is a clear manifestation of the Government’s commitment to resolving political differences through dialogue and constitutional means. We are also actively undertaking rehabilitation and reconstruction programmes in conflict-affected areas.
I would like to reaffirm that the Government is committed to consolidating peace and stability throughout the country. We continue to pursue dialogue for sustainable and peaceful solutions. In order to ensure accountability, reconciliation, truth-telling and healing. Ethiopia is finalizing its transitional justice policy. Nationwide consultations on policy options for transitional justice have been effectively conducted in all regions across the country. Through the National Dialogue Commission. Ethiopia has also embarked on inclusive dialogue to address both past and current societal concerns. We are confident that will contribute to realizing a prosperous future for all citizens.
Conflict-induced crises in the Horn of Africa require a regional approach, with the support of the international community. We express our solidarity with the brotherly nation of the Republic of the Sudan, which is facing difficult times. We are confident that the Sudan will find a way to resolve the conflict peacefully and re-establish order. Ethiopia has been supporting the efforts for peace, with full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Sudan.
It is important to ensure that all peace initiatives be coordinated. Ethiopia continues to fulfil its responsibility by promoting regional integration to advance peace, stability, economic cooperation and people-to-people ties. We are working to realize the development potential of our region. Ethiopia is determined to cooperate with its neighbours to expand trade, investment and regional integration through infrastructure development, efficient logistics and connectivity. Any bottleneck that might constrain the shared prosperity of the region needs to be addressed in a concerted approach. Fostering closer partnership is critical for creating access to seamless connectivity.
Cultivating mutual trust and friendship is the right choice for regional cooperation and interdependence. Regional cooperation positively impacts the lives of people, especially when complemented by well- developed infrastructure projects. The Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam is one such project that meets the legitimate development aspirations of Ethiopians and the region at large. Ethiopia welcomes the resumption of the trilateral talks with Egypt and the Sudan. We remain committed to a negotiated win-win outcome facilitated by the African Union.
Africa is a continent of hope, with immense potential for prosperity. The continent has already been implementing its transformative and ambitious Agenda 2063. However, unleashing Africa’s potential requires mobilizing domestic and external financial resources. The international financial architecture should be reformed, with special consideration for Africa’s needs and priorities. A fast-track resolution of Africa’s debt 
crisis and the provision of additional development financing should be at the top of our agenda.
Ethiopia advocates for an inclusive international order that recognizes the contribution of all countries. The very survival of humankind, the safety of our planet and the peace and security of the world are at stake. Therefore, hope, justice and equality for all should indeed define the fundamental agenda of the Assembly. Beyond the rhetoric, this organ has a responsibility to promote global consensus and translate ideas proposed in this very Hall into concrete actions.
As I conclude. I would like to emphasize that we are at a critical juncture when humankind must come together with unity of purpose for peace and prosperity. Fully aware that our time to serve is limited, each of us gathered here today should reflect on the legacy that we would like to leave behind for future generations.
