It is an honour to address the General Assembly once again.
I represent Georgia, a strong nation that values freedom, cherishes its rich heritage and embraces progress amid an ever-changing geopolitical landscape.
As members are aware, my country experienced a full-scale military aggression in 2008 and continues to endure its destructive consequences. That is still evident in the occupation of 20 per cent of Georgian territory by the Russian Federation and the displacement of hundreds of thousands of people from their homes.
I can confidently state that despite the devastation that we have endured, we have not hesitated to pursue our ambitions. We have transformed Georgia into a dynamic society, fully committed to the realization of the fundamental principles and values enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Georgia understands the cost of war and recognizes the value of peace. Since 2012, our Government has built and maintained an uninterrupted decade of peace and stability.
I would like to take this opportunity to express our deep appreciation to the international community for its unwavering support for Georgia’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. To ensure our continued peaceful existence. I call on the international community to persuade the Russian Federation to engage with the Geneva international discussions and fully implement the European Union (EU)-mediated 2008 ceasefire agreement.
Thanks to our pragmatic foreign policy, we have sustained economic growth over the past decade. We continue to make critical investments to improve the quality of life for all Georgians. We have experienced double-digit economic growth for two consecutive years, with a gross domestic product (GDP) growth rate of more than 10 per cent in 2021 and 2022. That positive growth trend has continued in 2023, with an average rate of economic growth of 7 per cent.
A substantial increase in GDP per capita is among my Government’s most significant achievements. Since 2012. GDP per capita has nearly doubled. We expect that that positive trend will continue.
In addition, in July, our official reserve assets reached a historic high, representing nearly a 90 per cent increase in July 2023 compared with 2012. The unemployment and poverty rates are also at historical lows.
The World Justice Project’s 2022 Rule of Law Index places Georgia as the top-ranking country in the Eastern Europe and Central Asia regions regarding the rule of law. According to the Eraser Institute’s annual report. “Economic Freedom of the World 2022”. Georgia is among the top 15 countries with the freest economies, while the Heritage Foundation Index of Economic Freedom 2023 places Georgia twenty-first in Europe, ahead of 11 European Union member States. The Crime Index 2023 positions Georgia as one of the safest countries in the world, ranking eighteenth in the world and eighth in Europe.
My Government developed and approved “Vision 2030 - Development Strategy of Georgia”, our country’s first long-term policy framework, which outlines a comprehensive set of reforms covering areas such as economic functions, social progress, good governance, justice and human rights protection, to be implemented by 2030.
While we work towards comprehensive, multifaceted progress, we also place significant emphasis on education and social welfare. The importance of robust education systems cannot be overstated, since they serve as the cornerstone for empowered, prosperous and productive societies. We embrace education by allocating resources to enhance digital literacy and bridge the digital divide.
Our efforts extend to all levels of education. We have allocated up to $1 billion to rehabilitate and construct schools and kindergartens across the country. We have increased investments in health care and social welfare. Currently. 95 per cent of our population benefits from universal health care, and we are continuously improving the quality of those services. We are determined to ensure the best possible care for all citizens.
Those successes are just a fraction of the progress that my country has made, but they clearly demonstrate our efforts to create opportunities for all our citizens, including those residing in the occupied territories of Georgia.
I say to our Abkhazian and Ossetian brothers and sisters that it is our common adversary that opposes our unity. We are an ingenious people, capable of incredible accomplishments, but only together can we ensure lasting stability, attract increased investments and reach our full potential as a united nation. We must not let this opportunity for a peaceful, stable and prosperous future together slip from our grasp.
Each step we take is aimed at bringing Georgia back into the European family, where it belongs. The remarkable achievements of our Government since 2012, including the EU association agreement, the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement and the visa-free regime with the European Union, demonstrate our geopolitical priority of becoming a State member of the European Union.
The recognition last June of Georgia’s “European perspective” has opened a new chapter in our relationship with the European Union. Recent surveys show that nearly 90 per cent of Georgians support EU membership, and we have demonstrated an unwavering commitment to addressing the 12 priorities set forth for EU candidate status. Through a rigorous, inclusive and transparent domestic implementation process involving all stakeholders, we are on track to complete them this year.
Our achievements deserve a favourable decision from the EU. As a front-runner among the so-called Associated Trio countries. Georgia has earned EU candidate status. We anticipate that Georgia’s performance and the current geopolitical context in the region will be fairly evaluated.
Granting Georgia candidate status is the only course of action. Considering recent developments. I would like to emphasize the importance of the rules-based international order and the fundamental principles outlined in the Charter of the United Nations.
Georgia is a responsible member of the international community actively contributing to global peace. For 
more than two decades, we have made substantial contributions to NATO missions worldwide, making Georgia one of the largest per capita contributors to the NATO missions in Iraq and Afghanistan. Thirty-two brave Georgian soldiers made the ultimate sacrifice in Afghanistan, while hundreds of others suffered injuries in the pursuit of freedom and peace. Georgia has sacrificed greatly to protect our shared values and common interests.
Georgia reiterates its unwavering commitment in that respect. We have significantly contributed to Tilled missions and honour that commitment.
As we strive for peace, prosperity, progress and sustainability for all, it is disheartening to witness aggression against a State Member of the United Nations. The war in Ukraine reawakens the trauma of the 2008 war in Georgia. We feel the pain and hardship that Ukraine currently faces and stand in full solidarity with the Ukrainian people.
We have sponsored, joined and supported more than 500 resolutions, statements, joint statements and other initiatives by major international organizations and institutions to support Ukraine and the Ukrainian people. Our Western partners, including the United States, the European Union and the United Kingdom, have repeatedly praised our compliance with all international financial sanctions.
My Government has been providing substantial humanitarian assistance to Ukraine and to its people since the beginning of the war, both in the country and to those currently residing in Georgia. Georgian schools have welcomed more than 2.200 Ukrainian students, ensuring that most of them receive education in the Ukrainian language while following the official Ukrainian curriculum.
Let me be clear: the fundamental philosophy of our Government is to avoid war and secure peace. Despite the challenges posed by our geographic location, we have managed to keep our people safe while supporting Ukraine and the international community through prudent policies and close coordination with our partners.
Through my Government’s Peaceful Neighbor Initiative, we are prepared to engage with our neighbours and friends from Armenia and Azerbaijan to finally bring lasting peace to the South Caucasus.
Georgia is emerging as a multidimensional regional hub. Our financial services sector has garnered global recognition, and we are attracting international investors, infusing additional capital into our economy. We have also prioritized investments in our infrastructure to enhance connectivity, successfully harnessing the logistics and energy sectors.
We are developing strategic transport corridors to establish crucial connections between Asia and Europe. Georgia’s participation in various international initiatives and infrastructure projects enhance connectivity, facilitating trade across the Black Sea region.
The Middle Corridor has been emerging as a secure and reliable route connecting East with West. We have signed comprehensive road maps with Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan to eliminate bottlenecks and enhance the Middle Corridor, from 2022 to 2027. Those road maps provide for specific actions related to transport and logistics infrastructure development, operational optimization, the implementation of a unified tariff policy, corridor digitalization and improvements to the regulatory framework.
In pursuit of enhancing East-West connectivity. Georgia established the Tbilisi Silk Road Forum in 2015, creating an international platform for dialogue among senior policymakers, businesses and community leaders. The upcoming Silk Road Forum is scheduled to take place in Tbilisi this year on 26 and 27 October, bringing together approximately 2.000 representatives, including high-ranking officials and business representatives from more than 60 countries.
Georgia has launched significant infrastructure projects, including the railway modernization project. Upon its completion by the end of 2024, the throughput capacity of Georgian railways will double.
The construction of a new Anaklia deep-sea port, which is expected to start soon, is a top priority for my Government. That greenfield public-private partnership project will create a state-of-the-art deep- sea port on the eastern coast of the Black Sea.
Our Government is improving air connectivity by building a new international airport in Tbilisi that will serve as a world-class transportation hub, cementing Georgia’s status as a prominent player in global aviation.
Furthermore, the EU flagship Black Sea submarine cable project, initiated by Georgia, is currently under way. That project involves the installation of a high- voltage submarine transmission grid to connect the South Caucasus region to South-East Europe through 
an underwater cable. The implementation of the project will strengthen energy security in Europe and in the South Caucasus region, foster the development of renewable energy sources and create new opportunities for transit between those two regions.
While recognizing the increasing demand for energy as well as the need to address climate change, we are actively pursuing new ventures in the field of renewable energy, including hydropower, wind, solar and other sustainable sources. Our objective is to attract investors and create a favourable environment for the establishment of innovative power plants, utilizing Georgia’s abundant green energy potential. All those ambitious transformational projects will bring jobs, economic growth and prosperity to our people and the entire region.
Georgia has made significant progress since regaining independence. We remain dedicated to achieving even greater results for the Georgian people while making significant contributions to the global community. We stand ready to strengthen international partnerships and collaboration to ensure a more peaceful and sustainable future.
Our shared humanity binds us together, and it is our collective responsibility to uplift one another and leave a lasting legacy for the generations to come.
