Today I am wearing a traditional fabric from East Nusa Tenggara. Indonesia, while members of my delegation are wearing diverse traditional fabrics representing the diversity of more than 1.000 ethnicities in Indonesia. We are diverse, but we are one.
The world now is at a strategic crossroads. Global solidarity and collective responsibility are the only answer to address the trust deficit and global inequality. That is the main essence of the outcome of the Bandung Conference, or Asia-Africa Conference, in 1955. Through the 10 Bandung Principles, we called for respect for human rights and the Charter of the United Nations, sovereignty and territorial integrity, the equality of all races and all nations, the peaceful settlement of disputes and the promotion of mutual interests and cooperation. The Bandung Conference reminded every country of its equal rights and responsibility in maintaining peace and stability, mainstreaming win-win cooperation and championing solidarity.
Indonesia brought along the Bandung spirit when we presided the Group of 20 last year, served as Chair of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) this year and visited Africa last month through our President. We will continue to bring that spirit everywhere we go, including the General Assembly. The Bandung spirit enables Indonesia to listen and become part of the solution. 
For Indonesia global leadership should not only be about power or the influence to dictate to others. Instead. Global leadership should be about listening to others, building bridges, respecting international laws consistently and putting all nations on an equal footing.
Rebuilding trust and reigniting global solidarity is the theme for this year’s General Assembly. The theme is timely and on point. We are again at a strategic crossroads, as we were in 1955. The trust deficit has reappeared, and the lack of solidarity has resurfaced. Both have hampered the attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), especially for countries in the global South. The question is — do we really have the commitment to rebuild trust and reignite global solidarity to attain the SDG targets together?
Will our presence today at the General Assembly really bring commitment and show readiness for global unity and collective responsibility? Standing before the Assembly, we have uttered a lot of good words and promises. Let us now be honest with ourselves: do we do what we said we would do? If all of us were committed to doing what we say and saying what we do. I am sure the current world situation would not be what we see right now — where the trust deficit is running deep, where differences are ever greater and sharper and where wars and conflicts are tearing us apart. The problem is that what we do is different from what we said. We talk differently about what we did. We do not walk the talk. Against that backdrop. I would like to share some thoughts on how we can rebuild trust and reignite global solidarity, in line with what we envisioned through the Bandung spirit.
First, on forging collective global leadership, the fate of the world cannot be defined by the mighty few. A peaceful, stable and prosperous world is the collective right and responsibility of all countries, big and small. North and South, developed and developing. We must all do our part and work together towards that common goal. And that can be achieved only if all of us adhere to the same rules. We must uphold respect for international law, particularly the fundamental principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity. That will ensure that disputes will be settled at the negotiating table rather than on the battlefield. A collective responsibility is also needed for the people of Palestine and Afghanistan. For far too long, we have allowed our Palestinian brothers and sisters to suffer. Indonesia will not back down an inch in our support for Palestinian statehood. In Afghanistan. Indonesia will do its utmost to help the Afghan people and ensure that the rights of women and girls are respected, including their right to education.
Secondly, on advocating development for all, every country has the same right to develop and grow. But the global architecture of today benefits only the select few. Trade discrimination against developing countries continues to happen. The global supply chain is being monopolized by certain countries. Many developing countries may not meet the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030. They also struggle with foreign debt and development financing. All of that will contribute to the erosion of trust and solidarity. Therefore, it is time for us to make a real change. Industrial down-streaming must not be an exclusive call from developing countries. Developed countries should also support that call to build a stronger future together. The same ideals are applicable in our fight against climate 
change and sea level rise, as well as safeguarding biodiversity. Indonesia has led by example by fulfilling its international obligation, including being among the early signatories to the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction. But developing countries cannot do that by themselves. We also need developed countries to fulfil their responsibility, including on climate financing, green investment and the transfer of technology. Technology and innovation should not be exclusively for the select few. Access to safe and secure digital technology for developing countries, including artificial intelligence, is crucial for future sustainable growth. Now is the time to practise what we have preached.
Thirdly, on reinforcing regional cooperation, regional institutions should be net contributors to, and building blocks for, global peace and prosperity. As this year’s ASEAN Chair. Indonesia had to navigate ASEAN through such geopolitical dynamics in the region. ASEAN has already managed to do that for the last five decades. We sent a clear message that we will not let our region be a pawn in rivalries. Instead. South-East Asia must be an epicentre of growth, where all countries can benefit meaningfully. Inclusivity will forever be the pillar of our region’s architecture. Suffice it to say — we managed to pull through. ASEAN has maintained its unity and established a long-term vision for ASEAN 2045. It has reinforced its centrality in strengthening regional resilience and preparing for the economy of the future. ASEAN has initiated closer partnerships with the Pacific Islands Forum and the Indian Ocean Rim Association for a stable and peaceful Indo-Pacific. We translated the ASEAN Outlook on the Indo-Pacific into concrete and inclusive cooperation. With regard to Myanmar, the implementation of the five-point consensus remains the main reference. ASEAN continues to urge the military junta to implement it. ASEAN will spare no effort to ensure that the people of Myanmar are not left alone.
Before I conclude. I wish to underline one point concerning the reform of our multilateral system. Many proposals have been produced throughout the years, but we are still far from getting anywhere. The best time for action may have already passed. But the second- best time is now. Let us translate our commitment into action. The 2024 Summit of the Future cannot fail. Trust and solidarity must be part of those efforts. Our people and the world await, and we must deliver.
