We have gathered in New York once again. The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are at their midpoint, facing mounting obstacles. To our dismay, the aggression against Ukraine has yet to cease.
This year, as the world stands at a historical inflection point. Japan is serving as a non-permanent member of the Security Council and the presidency of the Group of Seven (G-7). In those capacities. I have heard the desperate calls for peace and the pleas of vulnerable people seeking help. We should respond to these voices and work towards a world filled with cooperation, not division and confrontation. That is my message to all the leaders of the Member States. In his report Our Common Agenda (A/75/982). Secretary-General Guterres called for international solidarity. Let us renew our commitment to a strong and effective multilateralism, with the United Nations at its core.
The world is facing complex and interrelated issues, ranging from climate change and infectious diseases to challenges to the rule of law. Now, at a time when international cooperation is needed more than ever, we cannot overcome those difficulties if the international community remains divided over ideologies or values. That is why I believe we should go back to the very basic foundation of treating human life and dignity with paramount importance. We should aim for a world caring for human dignity, where vulnerable people can live safely and securely.
At a time when the international community is facing multiple crises and increasingly being divided, we need a common language that resonates with all of us. By shedding new light on human dignity. I believe that the international community can overcome differences in regimes or values and steadily advance human-centred international cooperation. Japan has led human-centred international cooperation based on the concept of human security. With that approach, we need to accelerate efforts among the international community to achieve the SDGs. The dignity of the individual must not be neglected as States and the international community tackle global challenges. To overcome inequalities and achieve the SDGs, quality growth and sustainable growth are essential. The key is to invest in people, which is my political credo.
The gender perspective is also important for quality growth. Japan aims to reduce inequalities and overcome social divisions by promoting women's participation. Japan will promote transparent and fair development finance in accordance with international rules to achieve sustainable growth in developing countries. Private finance will also be tapped to fill the gap of development finance. Japan will work with other countries to find ways to manage economies that protect human dignity while attracting investment dynamism.
In order to address unprecedented crises and challenges and to protect and strengthen human dignity, let us start step by step where we can. The first step is cooperation towards the realization of a peaceful and stable international community where human dignity is respected. Hailing from Hiroshima, which was devastated by atomic bombing. I have made nuclear disarmament my lifelong mission. With a view to achieving a world without nuclear weapons, we will continue to bolster realistic and practical efforts, while upholding and strengthening the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons by implementing measures under the Hiroshima Action Plan. I call on the political leaders of nuclear-weapon States and other countries around the globe to step up their engagement on nuclear disarmament so that people from all walks of life are exposed to its importance and take concrete action, not despite of but because of the challenging security environment. With a view to working towards a world without nuclear weapons, which we have been striving for together with the hibakusha — the surviving victims of atomic bombings — we must crystalize the nuclear disarmament trend, which has been successfully mainstreamed thanks to the efforts of our predecessors.
As we speak, we are faced with the threat of the reversal of the downward trend of the global number of nuclear weapons. The significance of a treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other explosive devices (FMCT), which was avowed here in the General Assembly 30 years ago, has not diminished by any measure. That is why I recently co-hosted a high- level event on FMCT, with the Philippines and Australia, to refocus political attention towards the FMCT on the thirtieth year of its initial proposal. Having nuclear- weapon States engage in concrete nuclear disarmament measures is key. Japan, as a non-permanent member of the Security Council, will work with the United Nations and relevant States to promote dialogue between nuclear- weapon States and non-nuclear-weapon States.
To set in stone the trend of mainstreaming nuclear disarmament, it is paramount to transcend purely governmental efforts and to engage in multilayered efforts. To overcome the divisive debate among academia and Government over whether we should be choosing deterrence or disarmament. Japan will contribute ¥3 billion to establish a Japan chair for a world without nuclear weapons at overseas research institutes and think tanks. We will also continue to build a global network of young people for nuclear abolition, making use of the Youth Leader Fund for a World Without Nuclear Weapons, which I established last year in cooperation with the United Nations. It is also essential to ensure nuclear safety and the security of nuclear materials and facilities, including in situations of conflict.
We also need to defend the dignity of people threatened by armed conflicts. Russia’s aggression against Ukraine continues. A food crisis must not be perpetuated. Supporting vulnerable people in Africa, the Middle East and elsewhere is essential.
We need to protect the safety of women and children, who are the most vulnerable in conflict situations, strengthen border controls and measures against trafficking in persons, and provide international support to retrieve abducted children. The women and peace and security agenda identifies women as crucial and active players in relevant policies for peace and security, and Japan will continue to promote that agenda.
The second issue is how to strike a balance between the progress of digitalization and human dignity. Digitalization is bringing benefits to all; however, there are risks of privacy and human rights violations. We need a digital ecosystem and international rules that are compatible with human dignity. That is why, at the G-7 Hiroshima Summit, we launched the Hiroshima Artificial Intelligence (Al) Process on generative Al, towards attaining trustworthy Al. Japan will also strengthen its support for digitalization in developing countries while ensuring cybersecurity.
Thirdly. Japan will work to mitigate the potential impact on people that may arise before net zero is achieved. Asian countries are the key to globally achieving net zero. Under the Asia Zero Emission Community initiative. Japan will promote effective cooperation, taking into account various needs.
Japan will further support disaster risk reduction for countries vulnerable to climate change, including island States, aiding efforts towards resilient economies and societies against sea level rise and natural disasters associated with extreme weather events. The ocean is a new frontier with abundant potential, and it is essential to take comprehensive measures, including making use of blue carbon to tackle climate change.
The perspective of international law is also important. Japan supports the preservation of existing baselines under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, even after the future regression of coastlines due to sea level rise. As the G-7 presidency, we have set a framework for cooperation on biodiversity conservation and a target of reducing additional plastic pollution to zero by 2040. Japan will continue to contribute in the field of environmental protection.
Fourthly, we must prepare for the next infectious disease outbreak. We must be ready for the next infectious disease, learning from the lessons learned in our fight against the coronavirus disease. At the G-7, both the public and private sectors have pledged more than $48 billion to achieve universal health coverage and to strengthen prevention, preparedness and response to health crises. Japan will contribute $7.5 billion for the period 2022- 2025. Together with the mobilization of domestic financial resources. Japan supports mobilizing financial resources in the private sector through the promotion of impact investments. Japan will continue to work with developing countries, including emerging economies, to ensure equitable access to medical countermeasures for health emergencies, based on the Group of 20 outcomes. 
At a time when the world is at an historical inflection point, we must reflect on how we started here. Inscribed in the Charter of the United Nations is the firm determination of our predecessors, following the experience of two world wars, to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war and to protect human dignity. The principles of the United Nations Charter, such as sovereign equality, respect for territorial integrity and the prohibition of the use of force, are fundamental principles of international law allowing people to live in peace and provide the basis of the rule of law.
International law exists for the benefit of weaker States. Together, under the rule of law. Japan would like to protect the right of vulnerable nations and peoples to live in peace in order to safeguard and strengthen human dignity. However, to this day. Russia, a permanent member of the Security Council, is infringing upon international law and the rule of law. Unilateral changes to the status quo by force or coercion are unacceptable anywhere in the world. The situation, which the General Assembly has repeatedly condemned as a violation of the United Nations Charter and human rights, must be rectified as soon as possible and the nuclear threat must be ended.
In March. I announced a new plan for a free and open Indo-Pacific. Based on the principles of freedom, the rule of law, inclusiveness, openness and diversity. Japan will work with countries that share a vision of a world where diverse nations coexist and prosper together. Japan will further extend our support for peacekeepers. Japan will strengthen the scope and quality of the United Nations Triangular Partnership Programme, with an additional contribution of approximately $9 million to support the capacity-building of personnel deployed in African Union peace support operations.
Japan’s policy on North Korea remains unchanged. Japan seeks to normalize its relationship with North Korea, in accordance with the Japan-Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Pyongyang Declaration, by comprehensively resolving outstanding issues of concern, such as the abductions, nuclear and missile issues, and the settlement of our unfortunate past. From the perspective of opening up a new era together. I would like to convey my determination to meet with President Kim Jong Un face to face, at any time and without any conditions, and to hold high-level talks under my direct supervision to realize a summit meeting at an early date.
The United Nations should be a place of listening to the voices of people facing difficulties, empowering them and overcoming such difficulties through cooperation. It should not be a place of confrontation and division. This year, we have agreed on concrete measures to strengthen the structures that support the President of the General Assembly. That is a firm step towards a United Nations for cooperation. We commend the Secretary-General’s leadership with his vision for multilateralism.
Initiatives to limit the use of the veto, which exacerbates divisions and confrontation in the United Nations, will strengthen and restore confidence in the Security Council. Japan will also pursue its efforts to increase the transparency of discussions in the Security Council, including by improving access to deliberations in the Security Council for Member States other than the permanent members. To that end. Japan will contribute to the clarification of the rules of the Security Council.
The world is changing dramatically. We need a Security Council that reflects the world today. Japan supports increased representation of Africa and the need to expand both the permanent and the non-permanent membership of the Council. Looking ahead to next year’s Summit of the Future and the subsequent eightieth anniversary of the United Nations, now is the opportunity to move to concrete action.
International cooperation that protects and strengthens human dignity will be the driving force that brings the world back towards the same goal. I am looking forward to deepening this discussion at next year’s Summit of the Future with future generations in mind. As we envision the post-2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development world. I believe that human dignity should be the core principle that illuminates the future of the international community. Let us join our forces to strengthen human dignity and create a United Nations for cooperation.