To begin. I would like to congratulate His Excellency Mr. Dennis Francis on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session.
Our debate is timely and very relevant to the current global context, as its theme is “Rebuilding trust and reigniting global solidarity: accelerating action on the 2030 Agenda and its Sustainable Development Goals towards peace, prosperity, progress and sustainability for all”.
It is my great pleasure to address this gathering today as the new Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Cambodia. I am committed to working closely with all Member States within this body of the United Nations to realize our shared aspirations.
I share the prevailing concerns over the growing global instability and geopolitical tensions that we are all witnessing at present. The escalation of the war in Ukraine — and its grave consequences — reflect a significant erosion of trust among Member States and a lack of confidence in multilateralism. The competition between super- and major Powers has diverted available resources to expand security capabilities amid widening gaps in funding to address the lingering effect of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and achieve the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Climate change, meanwhile, is threatening the existence of humankind. Without bold and urgent action on our part, the world will see further increases in poverty, hunger and the risk of pandemics, as well as more entrenched cycles of instability and conflict.
It is high time to restore strategic security trust among all nations and trust in the rules-based global system, in which all States fully respect international laws and norms as well as the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.
We should strengthen and leverage the convening power of the United Nations system to help reignite global solidarity so as to build a safer and more prosperous world for all. First and foremost, we must more strongly emphasize the need to address development issues and prevent existing conflicts from widening. 
In that regard. Cambodia highly appreciates the Secretary-General’s New Agenda for Peace, with its ambitious recommendations for global stability, and his vision for the future of global cooperation as outlined in his report entitled Our Common Agenda (A/75/982). We strongly support his initiatives with respect to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the climate. I am confident that his call for an SDG Stimulus — to invest $500 billion a year in sustainable development and climate action between now and 2030 — will put the progress on SDG implementation back on track. The climate solidarity pact that he proposed will lead to a reduction of emissions in line with the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities.
With enduring peace and stability. Cambodia continues to make notable progress on every front. Over the past two decades, poverty has fallen steadily, at an average annual rate of 1.6 per cent. Our economy grew by more than 7 per cent a year until COVID-19 broke out. We were hailed as one of the most successful countries in controlling the pandemic and recovering from its impact. Economic growth returned to 5.2 per cent in 2022 and is expected to continue growing at 5.6 percent in 2023.
As highlighted in our second voluntary national review, in July. 72.5 per cent of Cambodia’s SDG indicators and sub-indicators are well on track. The country is steadily transitioning from least developed to developing country status, in 2027. That is thanks to sound Government policies and our ability to maintain peace, political stability, high economic growth, equitable distribution of benefits from growth and forging good cooperation with all stakeholders.
Our democracy-building process has steadily advanced. In July. Cambodia successfully held general elections, with 18 political parties contesting. More than 8.2 million people cast their ballots — a turnout rate of 84.59 per cent. That is the highest since the United Nations-supervised elections in 1993 and a clear indication of our people’s greater political maturity and enthusiasm in exercising their democratic rights. The election has been widely assessed as free, fair, credible and just by thousands of observers, including 333 from abroad representing 65 countries.
Like many developing countries. Cambodia has a lot more to do to reach our goal of becoming an upper middle-income country by 2030 and a resilient, vibrant and prosperous high-income country by 2050. To that end, and in line with the Secretary-General’s call for Member States to deliver a “Rescue Plan for People and Planet”, my Government is committed to taking transformative actions through our recently launched Pentagonal Strategy for Cambodia’s socioeconomic development over the next 25 years.
The Pentagonal Strategy is being implemented from phase I in the five areas of growth, employment, equity, efficiency and sustainability. The five key priorities are people, roads, water, electricity and technology — especially digital technology, to address the fourth industrial revolution and the digital transformation of Cambodia’s economy.
I would like to add that the main objectives of the strategy include, on the one hand, maintaining the positive momentum of peace, economic growth and development in general and, on the other, building and strengthening the foundations necessary to accelerate national development through resilience in five areas — the public sector, the economy, the financial sector, human and social capital, and the environment, including climate change response.
For the success of the Pentagonal Strategy. Cambodia will accelerate its governance reforms to ensure that our public administration runs efficiently with a high level of integrity. We will safeguard peace, political stability, security and the social order, and maintain macroeconomic stability.
To that end. Cambodia will further enhance partnerships and cooperation for development and keep welcoming the support of all friendly partners, both technical and financial, to help Cambodia achieve its SDGs while continuing to deepen its regional and global integration.
Cambodia will continue on its present path of an independent and neutral foreign policy, based on the rule of law, equal mutual respect and adherence to the principles of the Charter of the United Nations, to promote its national interests, strengthen existing friendships and build more amicable ties.
Cambodia remains resolute against the threat or use of force in international relations, interference in the internal affairs of and aggression against other independent nations. Cambodia will not authorize any foreign military base on its territory, as clearly stated in its Constitution. Cambodia will not allow any country or any group to use its territory against another country. Cambodia will further endeavour to strengthen and expand good cooperation with 
nations around the world through bilateral, regional and international frameworks to contribute to global peace, security, stability, sustainable development and prosperity shared by all.
In addition to the SDGs under the global framework. Cambodia has added its own specific goal related to mine action — namely, a “Mine-Free Cambodia by 2025”. In that effort, we call for continued financial and technical support. We also urge greater participation by the international community to raise awareness of the dangers of landmines and unexploded ordnance, the hidden killers that threaten human security even after armed conflicts end.
Cambodia welcomes the Global Accelerator on Jobs and Social Protection for Just Transitions, initiated by Antonio Guterres. We are proud to have been selected as one of the 10 potential pathfinder countries.
To achieve the SDGs. Cambodia calls on the international community to intensify efforts, strengthen cooperation and rebuild trust and confidence to end wars, address the root causes of conflicts and reinvigorate solidarity for the achievement of the Goals.
As a troop-contributing country. Cambodia fully supports increasing the portion of official development assistance for peace-building. Cambodia remains steadfast in its commitment to peacekeeping operations in contributing to international peace, security and stability, which are crucial to sustainable development. To further contribute to that process. Cambodia has decided to stand for membership of the Organizational Committee of the Peace-building Commission for the term 2025 to 2026. We seek the invaluable support of members for our candidature to that body.
In conclusion, despite the many challenges and the prevailing instability, we can build a better world for all by working together towards our common goals with reinforced mutual trust and global solidarity. Cambodia fully supports the adoption of the SDG Summit political declaration and the draft decision of the Summit of the Future. Those documents will help keep progress towards the SDGs on track and ensure their achievement by 2030.