At the outset allow me, to share warm greetings from the Government and the people of the Republic of Kiribati. In the name of the Almighty God in whom we place our trust and who is our anchor of solidarity. Kam na bane n Mauri\
I join previous speakers in congratulating President Dennis Francis on his election and I wish him every success as he guides these important deliberations.
The theme of this debate. “Rebuilding trust and reigniting global solidarity: Accelerating action on the 2030 Agenda and its Sustainable Development Goals towards peace, prosperity, progress and sustainability for all”, resonates deeply with the aspirations of our people. In our fast-changing world, predicated by multiple challenges, part of the theme — “rebuilding trust and reigniting global solidarity” — is very timely and crucial.
As we all know, trust is the corner stone of any relationship, which, when strained, creates uncertainties, mistrust and instability. Geopolitical tensions, economic disparities and the unforeseen challenges brought about by events like pandemics, climate-related crises and disasters have tested the resolve of national Governments, their peoples and their partners. The call to rebuild trust therefore highlights the need for countries to re-establish faith in multilateral cooperation and diplomacy. It highlights the importance of transparent communication, mutual understanding and engaging with each other to forge strategic partnerships for our common good and development. A renewed commitment to accountability, good governance and responsive policies can contribute to promoting a more engaged and empowered global community.
At the same time, the call to reignite global solidarity reflects our recognition that our global challenges and opportunities are intertwined. It encourages countries not only to recognize but also to deliver actions to resolve issues such as poverty, inequality, climate change and health care. The idea of global solidarity underscores the principle that no nation can thrive in isolation and recognizes the uniqueness of each country’s context and need. The experience of the coronavirus disease pandemic is exemplary of the world coming together as one family. While we recognize the essential need for science to address pandemics, it is important for Member State to work together to gain a better understanding of the variants and vaccines before they are rolled out.
Since the launching of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in 2015, my Government has launched Kiribati’s first-ever long-term development plan, identifying our priorities for development. The Kiribati 20-Year Vision is rooted firmly in the needs of all I-Kiribati and commits my Government to transforming Kiribati into a wealthier, healthier and peaceful nation. It recognizes the need to align our national priorities with the SDGs and complement our national efforts with those outlined by our United Nations family.
In 2018, my Government became one of the few Member States to deliver a voluntary national report, outlining our policy actions to achieve our SDGs. The report enabled us to take stock of our development and assess our future. To ensure sustainability and ownership of our desired development goals, we have engaged in extensive consultations at all levels. As the year 2030 is imminent, time is of the essence. It is imperative for our United Nations family to stay on track in our efforts to achieve our goals set forth in the SDGs. That will entail setting ambitious targets and mobilizing resources, technology, innovation and policy changes to ensure that the goals are achieved on time. However, there is no guarantee that the SDG goals will be achieved; therefore; Kiribati’s graduation from the status of least developed country would not be sustainable.
Since our independence in 1979, our nation has enjoyed 44 years of stable and peaceful governance. We continue to recognize the independence of the three arms of Government, trusting that each arm discharges its duties with the highest level of integrity in a transparent, respectful and honest manner. We are committed and determined to ensure that Kiribati remains peaceful as we chart our future. But peace can be precarious as determining factors are often beyond our control. We have the human resources yet lack the capacity or necessary skills to develop our country. Equally important is our commitment to maximizing 
benefits to our people, uplifting our communities and maintaining our cultural values for peace.
During this year’s national day celebrations, after so many years Kiribati for the first time in its history successfully reunited all faith-based organizations to gather again as one family under one roof to worship God. All Christian denominations, including the Baha’i faith and followers of Islam in Kiribati, rejoiced in songs of praise and in richness of prayers. During that worship, it was heartening to be in an atmosphere where one could truly feel the grace, peace and love of God. Also, recognizing that the greater humility of being an I-Kiribati is far more effective than the differences among faiths in sustaining peace. We invite the rest of the world to follow that example.
As part of our commitment to global peace, my Government is working closely with the United Nations to engage our police in the United Nations peacekeeping missions, with the support of various partners. We will commit to supporting gender balance in recognition of Kiribati’s ongoing commitment to equal representation and opportunities. In addition. Kiribati has strengthened its policies and laws to support and empower women and girls, people with disabilities, elders, the unemployed, youth and children.
We must recall our commitments under our Charter of the United Nations to building a safe, peaceful and secure home for our peoples, individually as sovereign nations and collectively as Members of the United Nations. In Kiribati, we strongly believe that this is deeply threatened and undermined by the continued existence of nuclear weapons, the discharge of nuclear- treated water and the leakage of radioactive materials into the blue Pacific Ocean. The existence of nuclear weapons also diminishes trust in the commitment of our United Nations family members to peace and stability if they continue to manufacture and possess nuclear weapons.
Kiribati will continue promoting the non-proliferation and ultimately the total elimination of nuclear weapons at our United Nations, in particular our obligations in keeping our region, our land, our upper airspace and our ocean free of environmental destruction and pollution by radioactive wastes and other materials, including plastics. Most important is the health of our people, especially those who were exposed to the nuclear test blasts on Christmas Island and those whose ancestral lands have been exploited, leaving pinnacles behind. Compensation must be made to those on Christmas Island, including the Banaban people affected by environmental degradation, to rebuild trust.
One of the global challenges and grave concerns that impacts our lives and future is corruption. The Government recognizes that fighting corruption is critical to achieving sustainable development, and accordingly hosted the first ever regional anti-corruption conference for Pacific leaders in 2020. The outcome of the conference. Teieniwa Vision, reaffirms Pacific unity against corruption and integrates good governance principles into participants’ broader development agenda. At the international level, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, along with the General Assembly, can lead the way by ensuring that anti-corruption efforts are prioritized in our pursuit of global sustainable development, with SDG 16 as our guidepost.
Enhancing prosperity is essential to sustaining peace, and so the Government is dedicated to people-centric principles, placing citizens at the centre of our decisions and services and promoting transparent governance. We value continuous learning and capacity development for a competent public service to deliver on development goals. Building capacity and the transfer of knowledge to enhance the capability of our people is sustainable. It allows our people to take ownership of our own national processes and procedures, thereby guiding our development. We acknowledge the support of our development partners, which needs to be well coordinated and harmonized to ensure fair and inclusive distribution and the allocation of limited resources among competing needs.
We are committed to expanding access to overseas labour markets, providing decent work conditions and adhering to international labour standards. In education, we invest in our young generation and educators, support accessible, well-resourced schools for quality learning environments, and ensure equal access to high-quality education at all levels to nurture our people and move our nation forward.
In our pursuit of SDG acceleration. Kiribati is faced with significant challenges due to its geographical isolation, the scattered situation of its islands within its 3.5 -million-square-kilometre economic exclusive zone, and its vulnerability to climate change, to name but a few. In the face of those significant challenges, the delivery of essential services such as education, health, security, including the implementation of 
activities related to achieving the SDGs in Kiribati, is very costly. We should be given increased access to financial resources to obtain equipment, infrastructure and other benefits to achieve the SDGs and, at the same time, develop our country. That includes an urgent call to scale up global financial resources and simplify guidelines to allow easy access. Achieving those will guarantee that Kiribati is placed in a better position to sustain peace and harmony.
With a vast ocean and airspace. Kiribati’s resources are central to our survival, development and security. To harness our ocean resources sustainably, we need financial assistance and access to the right capabilities, technology and equipment. Likewise, the management of our airspace is important for security purposes. It will enable us to effectively manage our maritime domain and airspace, ensuring responsible utilization while protecting our fragile ecosystem.
At the forefront of climate change. Kiribati is experiencing intensifying severe drought and coastal inundation affecting homes, public infrastructure, food and water security. The projected cost for adaptation has significantly increased. Therefore, developed countries are urged to put more funds beyond the global pledge agreed to in Paris. That would also finance loss and damage and facilitate investment in early warning systems and forecasts. With that said, it would help our people adapt to changing environmental conditions and to build resilience in our communities.
Sustainability has become the new governance imperative, which needs to be clearly understood. As leaders of today, it is vital that we know exactly what we want to sustain and at what scale, and to be wary of the implications. That will require us to be more diligent, patient and hard-working with sheer determination to ensure that the sustainability of resources, efforts and time is optimally maximized for the betterment of all.
In conclusion, on behalf of the Government and the people of Kiribati. I should like to join previous speakers in offering our condolences to the Governments and the peoples of Morocco and Libya with respect to the tragedy that have faced. May God bless them.
In conclusion, let us embrace our traditional blessings of Te Mauri, Te Root ao Te Tabomoa, which literally means “Health, peace and prosperity”.
