I congratulate His Excellency Mr. Dennis Francis on his assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session. Let me also pay tribute to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his dedication to global peace and prosperity.
This year marks the seventieth anniversary of the Korean War armistice. After the invasion by communist totalitarian forces, the fate of the Republic of Korea hung in the balance. Thankfully, with the support of United Nations forces, the nation dramatically defended its freedom. The determined decision of Trygve Lie, the first Secretary-General of the United Nations, who viewed the armed invasion of the Republic of Korea as a challenge to world peace and led the effort to convene the Security Council to adopt resolution 84 (1950), intervening in the war, remains deeply ingrained in the minds of the Korean people. Over the past 70 years. Korea has risen from the ashes of war to blossom into a liberal democracy and a market economy. Today Korea is determined to contribute responsibly to the international community with the goal of promoting social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom, as championed in the Charter of the United Nations.
The theme of the seventy-eighth session of the Assembly is “Rebuilding trust and reigniting global solidarity: Accelerating action on the 2030 Agenda and its Sustainable Development Goals towards peace, prosperity, progress and sustainability for all”. The war in Ukraine, which has been going on for a year and a half, has deepened the divisions in values and ideologies within the international community. It has also exacerbated the economic repercussions of the coronavirus disease pandemic, causing the global economy to contract and leading to food and energy crises in many parts of the world. In difficult times, it is the vulnerable who suffer more. In the face of today’s multifaceted global crises on an unprecedented scale, the divisions among countries are widening in various areas, including security, economy, technology, health, environment and culture. To bridge those divides and ensure harmonious coexistence among all nations, the international community must stand together, with the United Nations at its core.
Today I would like to address those divisions in three key areas — the development, climate and digital arenas. Many countries around the world still lack infrastructure essential to everyday life. Development is unattainable without basic infrastructure such as water and sewage systems to process and supply water for drinking and daily use, energy facilities to provide electricity and health care to treat the sick. To narrow the development divide, countries with financial and technological capacities must take on responsible roles. Korea is intending to boldly increase its official development assistance (ODA). Despite this year’s fiscal austerity measures, the Korean Government has raised the ODA budget plan for the upcoming year by more than 40 per cent. As a result. Korea’s ODA budget is expected to more than double next year compared to fiscal year 2019. We will allocate the increased ODA funds to foster development cooperation tailored to the needs of our partner countries. In particular, we will actively channel our ODA efforts into education and training, to help partner countries build the capacity to progress economically and socially on their own. It is said that a year of education can increase income by approximately 10 per cent. That impact is more pronounced among low-income groups and women. We must expand those benefits on a global scale.
The climate crisis is another challenge that exacerbates the economic divide between nations and impedes humankind’s sustainable development. This past July, we experienced the hottest summer ever recorded on Earth. On this boiling Earth, extreme weather events such as heatwaves, torrential rains and typhoons have become the norm. Climate change is causing geopolitical shifts in agriculture and fisheries, worsening the crises in countries that are vulnerable to food shortages. To assist countries that are vulnerable to climate change in reducing their carbon emissions and accelerating their transition to clean energy. 
Korea will scale up its green ODA. In particular, we will contribute an additional $300 million to the Green Climate Fund. We anticipate the international community’s active financial support for the Green Climate Fund. We also hope that the international community’s collective resolve to bridge the climate divide will lead to tangible actions.
Korea will not only harness renewable energy, but it will also extensively employ high-efficiency carbon-free energy, such as nuclear power and hydrogen, as a realistic measure for accelerating our pursuit of carbon neutrality. We also plan to share those energy sources with countries that are vulnerable to climate change, ensuring that they can benefit as well. To that end. Korea aims to pursue international joint research on carbon-free energy and facilitate technological innovation and investments from the private sector. Korea will also launch a carbon-free alliance — an open platform that anyone in the world can join to promote the adoption of carbon-free energy.
Next. Korea plans to play a leading role in bridging the digital divide, utilizing our strengths in information and communications technologies. Today, with advancements in digital technology, cultures and industries are shifting towards digital-based paradigms. The digital divide is a major cause of economic divide. Therefore, bridging the digital divide will contribute positively to resolving the challenges faced by the global South. Korea will support the digital transformation of countries with limited digital penetration and utilization, which will enhance their citizens’ access to education, health care and financial services.
Last September at New York University and in June at the Sorbonne in Paris. I stressed that digital advancements can be achieved only when fair access to artificial intelligence (Al) and digital technologies, as well as their safe use, is ensured. I have also proposed the establishment of an international organization under the United Nations to discuss and set forth rules regarding digital ethics. If we fail to curb the spread of fake news resulting from the misuse of Al and digital technologies, our freedom will be at risk, the market economy anchored in liberal democracy will be in peril and our very future will be under threat. Korea plans to introduce in the near future a digital bill of rights to outline a desirable future for the digital order. To support the creation of an international organization under the United Nations and provide concrete directions for the development of Al governance, the Korean Government plans to host a global Al forum. We also plan to collaborate closely with the high-level advisory body on Al being established by the United Nations to provide a network for communication and collaboration among global experts.
Without international peace and security, development and prosperity will remain elusive. During my visit to Kyiv last July. I saw the sorrow in the eyes of children being treated at the national children’s hospital. Children are our future, yet children are often the first victims of war. In line with our commitment to our Ukraine Peace and Solidarity Initiative, the Korean Government will implement a comprehensive support programme that encompasses security, humanitarian assistance and reconstruction. Furthermore, as I pledged at the Group of 20 Summit just two weeks ago. Korea will actively support Ukraine’s reconstruction by providing $300 million next year, as well as a mid- to long-term support package exceeding $2 billion.
The nuclear and missile programmes of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea pose not only a direct and existential threat to the peace of the Republic of Korea, but also a serious challenge to peace in the Indo-Pacific region and across the globe. It is paradoxical that a permanent member of the Security Council, entrusted as the ultimate guardian of world peace, would wage war by invading another sovereign nation and receive arms and ammunition from a regime that blatantly violates Security Council resolutions. In such a situation, the call to reform the Security Council will receive broad support. If the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea acquires the information and technology necessary to enhance its weapons of mass destruction capabilities in exchange for supporting Russia with conventional weapons, the deal will be a direct provocation that threatens the peace and security of not only Ukraine but also the Republic of Korea, which, together with its allies and partners, will not stand idly by.
While military strength may vary among countries, by uniting in unwavering solidarity and steadfastly adhering to our principles, we can deter any unlawful provocation. As a member of the Security Council for the 2024-2025 term, the Republic of Korea is committed to playing a responsible role in promoting and building global peace as we work closely with fellow United Nations States Members. Passing on to future generations an international order grounded in justice and the rule of law, along with sustainable freedom. 
peace and prosperity, is a historic responsibility shared by all of us here today. The Republic of Korea, together with the United Nations, will readily take on that responsibility.
The Republic of Korea aspires to host World Expo 2030 to fulfil its responsibility and contribute to the international community. Busan served as the last bastion defending the freedom of the Republic of Korea when most of the country was invaded and conquered by communist forces more than 70 years ago. It was also Busan that rose from the ruins of the Korean War and became the world’s second-largest transhipment hub, leading the Miracle on the Han River. Without Busan. Korea would not have been able to stand where it is today. Now the Republic of Korea will play its role as a responsible member of the global community by hosting World Expo 2030 in Busan — a gateway that links the Eurasian continent and the Pacific. Korea intends to give back to the international community by sharing its experience of economic growth and development, reciprocating the help that it has received in the past. The Great Exhibition of 1851 in London was an exposition of the industrial revolution, while the 1900 Paris Exposition was one of culture. The 1962 Seattle Expo was an exposition that inaugurated the new space era. The 2000 Hannover Expo was an exposition devoted to the environment. The 2030 Busan Expo will be an exposition of solidarity.
Freedom and solidarity are the basis of Korea’s foreign policy. Building upon those values, the 2030 Busan Expo will serve as a platform for solidarity, through which the world’s citizens can overcome crises and spread freedom together. The Busan Expo will be a festival in which all nations can come together to share their history, culture, goods and visions for the future. The Expo will make a significant contribution to the freedom, peace and prosperity of citizens around the globe.
