Let me begin by extending sympathy to all nations experiencing loss of life due to the recent natural disasters. May the souls of all the faithful departed rest in perfect peace.
I am honoured to address the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session on behalf of the Government and the people of the Republic of Liberia. I congratulate His Excellency Mr. Dennis Francis on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session, trusting that he will bring his wealth of experience to bear on the work of the Assembly. I wish to assure him of my delegation’s full support as he steers the work of the Assembly successfully, in fulfilment of the expectations and confidence reposed in him.
Let me use this occasion to also congratulate his predecessor. His Excellency Mr. Csaba Korosi, on the capable manner in which he administered the affairs of the General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session. Let me also commend His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, the Secretary-General, for the astute manner in which he continues to administer the affairs of the United Nations in these difficult and challenging times. His foresight, commitment and dedication have kept the United Nations firmly on course.
We have convened at a time when the world faces many challenges: security, social, economic and political, as well as natural disasters. We must exert collective efforts to confront those challenges, with a view to resolving them in order to bring about a safer, secure and prosperous future.
We must continue to promote global solidarity and rebuild trust in accelerating progress on the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The SDGs, by design, require bilateral and multilateral collaboration to achieve the results that we seek.
The theme of this year’s debate. “Rebuilding trust and reigniting global solidarity: accelerating action on the 2030 Agenda and its Sustainable Development Goals towards peace, prosperity, progress and sustainability for all.” adequately captures our current global demands.
There is a critical need to ensure that development assistance is aligned with SDG projects. That is why my delegation welcomes and supports the Secretary-General’s agenda of action to accelerate the implementation of existing agreements, including the Sustainable Development Goals, and to re-embrace global solidarity and find new ways to work together for the common good of humankind.
As the world deals with unprecedented global political and security challenges, there are growing concerns about the proliferation of non-State armed actors, threats of nuclear escalation and extreme climate conditions. Those challenges continue to serve as obstacles to our quest for a safe and peaceful world.
Achieving the 2030 vision involves ensuring that the journey is secured through accountability and mutual understanding. Liberia is committed to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the SDGs; they are in line with our flagship national development plan — the Pro-Poor Agenda for Prosperity and Development, which reflects our resolve to achieve peace and prosperity while addressing the structural impediments to economic growth and national development.
The slowdown in global economic growth continues to be a challenge. Over the past 12 months. Liberia has made progress in areas ranging from health to education, gender equality and infrastructure development. We are proud of our achievements in reducing maternal mortality rates, increasing gender parity in school enrolment and elevating our overall health and well-being.
Liberia appreciates the fact that this body has once again directed its attention to issues of global health, as demonstrated by the number of high-level meetings to keep that critical issue on our collective agenda.
We emphasize unity of purpose as we address challenges that involve the provision of basic services to all people. Given that more than 60 per cent of Liberia’s population is composed of young people, the future of our nation rests on their shoulders. Understanding that immense responsibility, we are committed to continue paving the way for their growth and development.
Cognizant of the fact that structural transformation drives prosperity, we are focused on infrastructure development, with roads and energy playing a critical part. Thanks to the support of our many partners, we remain unwavering in our commitment to explore means to further the implementation of the Sustainable 
Development Goals, as it represents the road map towards prosperity.
I support Secretary-General Antonio Guterres’s proposed SDG Stimulus plan and call for the actualization of $500 billion per year in order to boost sustainable development for developing countries through tackling the high cost of debt and the rising risk of debt distress; the scaling up of affordable longterm financing for development; and the expansion of contingency financing to countries in need.
Liberia profoundly appreciates the continued engagement and support of the United Nations system in consolidating its peace and in its efforts to address emerging challenges. Liberia will continue to cooperate and collaborate with the United Nations as it continues to rebuild and strengthen its institutions and infrastructure.
Five years ago, on the occasion of my first address to the General Assembly (see A/73/PV.8), we informed members about the peaceful democratic transition that had just taken place in Liberia. With the support of the United Nations and that of our friends, we have kept the democratic torch burning. We have maintained peace and security. We have protected human rights and the right of the media to operate peacefully and freely.
The Liberian people have enjoyed the full exercise of their constitutional rights. The country is well on course to consolidate its democratic credentials.
I am pleased to inform the Assembly once again that in a few weeks Liberians will go to the polls, in keeping with the Liberian Constitution, to vote in our scheduled presidential and legislative elections. The October polls will mark the fourth peaceful general elections in Liberia since the end of the civil war in 2003.
This seventy-eighth session is taking place at a time when my country is preparing for the first elections since the withdrawal of the United Nations peacekeeping presence from Liberia. The 10 October election is an opportunity to sustain the gains made in our reconstruction and development processes.
The Government of Liberia has taken all measures necessary to ensure free, fair, transparent, peaceful, inclusive and credible elections. The National Elections Commission has been strengthened to ensure that it operates without undue influence. In addition, political parties have committed themselves to a non-violent electoral process by signing the 2023 Farmington River Declaration, which obligates all actors in the elections to continue to promote peace.
Let me, as a strong believer in democracy, reiterate my call for respect for constitutional governance and respect for the will of the people. While addressing the issue of elections and democracy, permit me to congratulate all democratically elected leaders around the world.
Our world is also under threat from natural calamities, as seen in extreme climate conditions globally. It is therefore our collective responsibility to urgently prioritize addressing the climate crisis as we strive to reach a target of a 64 per cent reduction in carbon emissions.
There remains a need to prioritize support to countries, including Liberia, that have the capacity to use their biodiversity in building resilience against the changing climate.
The United Nations has always been confronted with challenges and has stood the test of time. Hence, these, too, will pass.
I wish to thank the Secretary-General for his New Agenda for Peace. Liberia is in solidarity with the bold steps needed to address the triple crises of disruption, biodiversity loss and pollution that are destroying our planet. Liberia is hopeful that concrete global action towards the attainment of the goals of Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) will be achieved.
Liberia’s journey is best captured in the spirit of unity, resilience and ambition. Together, through collaboration and with a shared purpose, we can, and must, shape a world that upholds the rights and dignity of every individual.
In alliance with our United Nations family. Liberia remains resolute in its commitment. We pledge to protect our planet, promote peace and prevent conflicts. We vow to ensure sustainable financing and amplify our partnerships, reflecting our shared determination for a brighter future.
We must also accept that that can be achieved only through collaboration between and among Governments, non-governmental stakeholders and other partners, which will guarantee transparency, accountability, good governance and the inclusion of all citizens in the decision-making process. 
Let us remind ourselves that our collective strength lies in our unity. Together we can overcome any challenge; rebuild trust; promote peace and religious tolerance; uphold the tenets of democracy and the rule of law; support women’s participation; encourage diplomacy and strengthen global solidarity.
