First of all. I would like to congratulate Mr. Dennis Francis of Trinidad and Tobago on assuming the post of President of the General Assembly. I assure him of Latvia’s full cooperation along the way.
The topic of this year’s general debate invites us to focus on rebuilding trust and global solidarity. Rooted in the Charter of the United Nations, both concepts are crucial for effective multilateralism. Today I would like to highlight the following points.
We are at a transformative moment for the global order. Russia’s unprovoked war of aggression against Ukraine continues to challenge the world in many ways. It is a test for the rules-based multilateral system. The Russian Federation’s brutal invasion of its neighbour runs counter to the fundamental United Nations principles of refraining from the use of force against the sovereignty and the territorial integrity of States. The blatant breach of those principles undermines the entire international system, especially if the aggressor 
is a nuclear-weapon State and a permanent member of the Security Council. It is not a dispute between two neighbouring countries; Russia’s attack was unprovoked. Russia is trying to redraw international borders by force to restore its former sphere of influence.
In 2008 and 2014, the international community made a grave mistake by not responding to Russia’s aggression against Georgia and the illegal annexation of Crimea. It sent the wrong message to Russia, allowing its aggressive imperial ambitions to advance. We are now seeing the consequences. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is a reminder of the struggle of a colonial empire to keep its territories. Ukraine is not Russia. It never was and never will be. Having experienced 50 years of Soviet occupation. Latvia knows the value of freedom and independence, like so many countries in other regions. The international community must stand together firmly against Russia’s attack, based on the principles and norms of international law. Respect for the United Nations Charter is in the vital interest of all States. The outcome of the war will determine global security for years to come. Latvia condemns in the strongest possible terms Russia’s ongoing aggression against Ukraine, which has been enabled by Lukashenko’s regime in Belarus. We cannot talk about restoring international trust until Russia ends the war and withdraws from Ukraine. Russia must withdraw all its forces and military equipment from Ukraine within its internationally recognized borders. Russia must stop its terror and atrocity crimes.
In response to those who call for a ceasefire and peaceful dialogue. I would like to recall that only Ukraine can decide when to start peace negotiations. Latvia supports Ukraine’s peace formula. Sustainable peace must be based on Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. I call on all Members of the United Nations to support those principles. Ukraine has shown remarkable determination in exercising its right to self-defence against Russia’s aggression. I urge the international community to continue providing all needed support to Ukraine and its people. Latvia will support Ukraine for as long as it takes. Our assistance to Ukraine has already exceeded 1.3 per cent of Latvia’s gross domestic product. Together with the private sector and civil society, we have sent humanitarian aid to Ukrainian regions. Latvia continues to give safe refuge to the Ukrainian people. We provide rehabilitation to wounded Ukrainian soldiers and victims of sexual violence. Comprehensive support for the Ukrainian people to rebuild their country will be required. It is important to already start laying the ground for the reconstruction of Ukraine.
Even in times of war, the rules of international humanitarian law apply. The evidence of Russia’s deliberate attacks on the civilian population and infrastructure in Ukraine is mounting. Innocent civilians, including children, are being killed. More than 11 million people have been forced to leave their homes. The illegal adoption and forcible deportation of Ukrainian children to Russia is of serious concern. We call on the United Nations to take a more active stance on the issue. Latvia knows all too well the heavy toll that the deportations and acts of repression by the occupying regime have cost generations. Russia must bear the full legal and financial responsibility for its aggression. We must ensure full accountability for all crimes committed in Ukraine. That means the responsibility of Russia as a State for violations of international law, as well as individual liability for the most serious international crimes. I commend the steps taken by the International Criminal Court to investigate atrocity crimes in Ukraine. Latvia has provided financial contributions to the Court, including to the Trust Fund for Victims. We support other international mechanisms documenting and investigating Russia’s violations.
However, neither the International Criminal Court nor any other existing mechanism is able to exercise jurisdiction over the crime of aggression against Ukraine. Every effort should be made to hold Russia’s leadership and military personnel accountable. At stake is whether impunity or abiding by the international rule of law will prevail. Latvia reiterates the need to establish a special international tribunal for the crime of aggression against Ukraine. The creation of a tribunal under the auspices of the United Nations would provide the strongest international legitimacy. I encourage other countries to support the proposal. The Register of Damage Caused by the Aggression of the Russian Federation against Ukraine, which was created by the Council of Europe, is an important step towards establishing a future international compensation mechanism. As the current holder of the presidency of the Council of Europe. Latvia launched the Register. We hope that more countries beyond the members of the Council of Europe will join that important initiative.
By blocking Ukraine’s exports and destroying its agricultural sector. Russia has disrupted grain deliveries worldwide; yet it claims to care about 
global food security. There is no doubt that Russia is directly responsible for the suffering of people worldwide. Increases in costs and food insecurity affect all regions. The Black Sea Grain Initiative was paramount for global food security. We condemn Russia’s unilateral termination of the Initiative. Food and energy are instruments of Russia’s warfare, fuelled by disinformation. Lies must be countered with truth and facts. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has caused shortages of food and fertilizer supplies; it was not the sanctions. Sanctions do not block the export of mineral fertilizers or grain from Russia. The truth is that Russia is benefiting from higher prices. Access to food is a human right, and hunger must never be used as a political tool. International efforts to facilitate Ukrainian exports for global food security must continue. Latvia cooperates with the World Food Programme to improve food security worldwide. I urge the United Nations to resolve the issue of the removal of the remaining Russian-owned fertilizer from Latvia’s territory so it can be delivered to countries in need as soon as possible. The United Nations system must respond more effectively to humanitarian needs.
The concept of solidarity has defined the work of the United Nations since the birth of the Organization. The Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) Summit, held two days ago, reaffirmed the importance of dialogue, cooperation and solidarity. At the same time, the Summit acknowledged the stark reality of the fact that achieving the global Goals by 2030 will be very challenging for many countries. International cooperation will be key. The global SDG Index ranks Latvia fourteenth among Member States for overall achievement of the global Goals. Latvia firmly believes that strengthening an innovative and eco-efficient economy, quality education and good governance will contribute to our development. The participation of the non-governmental sector and of young people has become an integral part of our national decision-making processes.
In a spirit of solidarity. Latvia’s development cooperation policy is becoming more global. A notable part of our development support has been provided to Ukraine and countries of the European Eastern Partnership and Central Asia. Latvia has now expanded its cooperation projects to countries in Africa, and we are ready to contribute to the promotion of peace, good governance, economic growth, digitalization and gender equality. Latvia also recognizes the climate-induced challenges that small island developing States (SIDS) face. Strengthening resilience remains at the core of SIDS sustainability, and Latvia is committed to contributing to the successful preparation of the United Nations SIDS conference next year, including financially. We will continue to follow the evolving work of the International Law Commission on the legal aspects of sea level rise, and we are already engaged in international legal proceedings addressing the obligations of States regarding climate change. Resilience to disinformation is another area where Latvia has meaningful experience. We must address the issue of the accountability of actors in the information environment, including at the global level.
The United Nations is not a perfect institution. Its inability to stop aggression or conflicts has often called its effectiveness into question. Still, as our only truly global organization, it is at the core of the multilateral system uniting all sovereign States, and it is especially important for smaller countries such as my own. The revitalization of the United Nations system and meaningful reforms of the Security Council are essential. The paralysis of the Security Council resulting from abuse of the veto is a serious concern, which is why Latvia supports efforts to make the Security Council more transparent and accountable for its lack of action. The power of the veto was created not as a privilege but as a responsibility. Latvia supports a more just, equitable representation of the world’s regions on the Security Council, including for African countries and SIDS.
Latvia will continue to be a responsible and reliable partner involved in peacekeeping and peace-building efforts. Our determination to protect the fundamental values of the Charter of the United Nations is guiding our candidacy for the Security Council elections in 2025. This Organization is as effective as the collective will of its Member States, and it is in our hands to safeguard and improve it.
