It is with great pride that I stand once more before the General Assembly of the United Nations to represent the Republic of Moldova — a country on the front line of the fight for democracy. 
Mr. Milambo (Zambia), Vice-President, took the Chair.
Today Moldova stands stronger and more resilient than one year ago. We stand firm in our belief in a democratic future. And we stand firm with Ukraine as our neighbour continues to resist Russia’s brutal invasion — an attack on its sovereignty and way of life. We stand firmly for Ukraine’s victory because when Ukraine wins the free world wins. Now more than ever, support for Ukraine must not diminish. Please continue supporting Ukraine.
Ukraine. Moldova. Europe and the free world are facing an external assault on our values. But countries like mine have not broken free from imperial chains only to be brought back into servitude. We push forward. Unlike our Ukrainian friends and neighbours, we are not facing an imminent military threat, but every day we are countering Russia’s hybrid assault. Russia has teamed up with corrupt crooks to destabilize us. Their hybrid toolbox includes energy blackmail, support for separatism, cyberattacks and disinformation campaigns. They also tried to overthrow our democratically elected Government, but each time they have failed.
We know they will try again. In soon-to-be-held elections, they will attempt to undermine our citizens’ ability to make their own democratic choices. That threat is not unique to us. Many countries in Europe and beyond our continent are feeling the sting of foreign interference in their democratic processes. That hybrid assault is conducted by those who oppose not just our democracy but all liberal democracies. We must stay vigilant, and we must stand united.
Against all odds, we have preserved peace across all of Moldova, including in the breakaway Transnistrian region, where Russian troops are stationed illegally and where concerns about human rights violations are deeply worrisome. Our commitment to a peaceful resolution remains steadfast, and I call here today for the unconditional withdrawal of those Russian forces. In the light of intertwined challenges, building Moldova’s resilience has not been an easy task. Yet we take heart in the fact that Moldova is not alone. Our friends and partners — the entire free world — stand with us.
Building resilience means that Moldova has moved from relying solely on Russian gas to having a mix of energy sources and backup storage. We are also building electricity lines to Europe, investing in energy efficiency and pursuing renewable sources. The true measure of a democracy’s success is its capacity to deliver a better life and real economic benefits to its citizens. Strengthening our economy as the war rages across the border is a daunting challenge, but we are determined. Small and medium-sized enterprises can now access funds to grow, digital public services are helping to cut red tape and the European Union market is open to exports of our fruit and vegetables. Inflation is down to 10 per cent, from a peak of 35 per cent last October. A major ratings agency has upgraded our outlook to stable.
We are comprehensively reforming the justice system and redoubling our efforts to defeat corruption and organized crime. Part of that effort involves reducing the malign influence of fugitive oligarchs who at one time held our State hostage. I am grateful to many in this Hall for imposing sanctions on those individuals. The next critical step in that journey is to ensure that the stolen money is returned to the Moldovan people. As evidence of our commitment, on corruption perceptions, as measured by Transparency International, we improved by 24 places in the past two years, our best score in a decade. On the World Justice Project Rule of Law Index, we have climbed 14 places since 2020.
Greater resilience will also come about through enhanced transport links with Europe, which are vitally important given Russia’s blockade of Ukrainian ports and the disruption of trade routes. We are upgrading roads and railways, and that modernized infrastructure will not only boost our trade and create jobs but also support solidarity lanes for Ukraine, ensuring that its grain reaches the regions where it is needed most, and one day those very connections will aid Ukraine’s postwar reconstruction.
As we build up defences and resilience. Moldova is increasingly recognized as a contributor to regional security, a strong neighbour to Ukraine and a partner of the European Union in countering security challenges. However, our commitment extends globally: Moldovan servicemen actively contribute to peacekeeping missions, including most recently in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Underscoring our commitment to the security of our continent, we hosted the European Political Community summit in June — a summit that further cemented our place in the European family. 
Achieving economic progress, improving security and reinforcing our democracy are part of our journey towards membership in the European Union. Moldova’s European aspirations have long been well known. In May. 100.000 Moldovans rallied in Chisinau to reassert their commitment to democracy — and to European Union membership. Let me be clear: Moldova’s European Union membership is not just a political choice; it is the only way to protect our liberty, peace and democracy. The enlargement of the European Union is the sole path to ensuring that our neighbourhood stays anchored in the free world and that we deliver better lives for our citizens. It will also demonstrate the European Union’s commitment to peace — the very reason the European Union was built.
When it comes to membership, we believe in a fair and merit-driven process, and we have been doing our homework diligently. With that in mind. I call on the European Commission and all European Union members to support us. I extend this call beyond European Union borders to all the countries of the free world, especially those with well-established, robust democracies that have long reaped its benefits and understand its worth.
The success or downfall of one democracy resonates globally. When one thrives, it inspires hope in others; when one falters, it threatens to unleash a domino effect. Today the fight for democracy anywhere is a fight for democracy everywhere, and in this interlinked fight for democracy we will prevail.
