It is a great honour for me to convey the cordial greetings of His Excellency Colonel Assimi Goita. President of the Transition and Head of State of Mali, on behalf of all the Malian people. From this rostrum. I am also speaking on behalf of His Excellency Brigadier General Abdourahamane Tiani. President of the National Council for the Safeguarding of the Homeland and Head of State of the Niger, precluded from speaking at the rostrum of this General Assembly session.
First of all. I would like to reiterate the sympathy of the authorities and people of Mali to the authorities and the people of Morocco. Libya. Turkey and Syria following the natural disasters that have plunged those brother countries into mourning.
Peace and security remain the priority for the populations of Mali and the Sahel after more than a decade of violence, with particularly devastating consequences. Yet that region was known as a haven of peace, social cohesion and coexistence among its communities. For its part. Mali has decided to change its paradigm and take its destiny into its own hands. In terms of security. Mali has therefore prioritized strengthening the capacities of the Malian Defence and Security Forces to enable them to discharge their sovereign duties of defending the national territory and protecting people and property. Today the Malian people have regained trust in their defence system.
Today the people of Mali are encouraged by the results achieved in the fight against armed terrorist groups and their foreign State sponsors. Mali once again strongly condemns the interference of certain Powers that continue to enable the criminal activities of terrorist armed groups in Mali and the Sahel.
It should be recalled that, on 15 August 2022, the Government of Mali alerted the Security Council to France’s acts of hostility and aggression (see S/2022/622). Instead of putting a stop to such practices, that country, a permanent member of the Security Council, continues its tactics to destabilize Mali and the Sahel with complete impunity, as demonstrated by the recent release of terrorists in the tri-border area of Burkina Faso. Mali and the Niger, outside any judicial framework and without the knowledge of the States concerned, to perpetrate more terrorist acts against our civilian populations and our defence and security forces.
France’s hostile actions are also illustrated by its ill-timed and illegal interventions to delay, or even prevent, the processing of our requests for funding from several subregional, regional and even international financial institutions. In the same vein, it is regrettable that the same country. France, tries to exploit African subregional organizations, and sometimes unfortunately succeeds, pitting brother countries against each other solely for its own geopolitical interests in a neocolonial and paternalistic approach.
Mali is aware of the fact that military action alone is not enough to put a lasting end to the complex challenges posed by terrorism and to certain issues of governance in the country. That is why the Government has adopted a comprehensive strategy, which includes political and institutional reform, development and addressing the specific concerns of young people and women, including employment and their representation in local and national decision-making bodies.
To create the conditions that will enable the Malian people’s deep-seated aspirations for change to be realized, the Government is committed to implementing the political and institutional reforms needed to rebuild the State. As part of that process, a referendum on Mali’s new Constitution, which was adopted by more than 96 per cent, was successfully held on 18 June. Its promulgation by the Head of State on 22 July marks the advent of the Fourth Republic of Mali. By taking that step, the Government of Mali is demonstrating its genuine resolve to return to a peaceful and secure constitutional order, including the holding of general elections in the coming months. 
After 10 years of presence in my country, the international response to Mali’s security challenges has not been commensurate with the threats. The expectations of the Malian people, repeatedly expressed by the authorities, have therefore often been ignored. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) has been unable to help Mali to re-establish its authority over its entire territory despite the substantial resources invested in it over the past 10 years. During its presence on the national territory, regrettably, the security situation in Mali has only deteriorated. Insecurity, which was confined to Mali’s northern regions at the time of its deployment in 2013, has now spread to the central and southern regions. That spread of insecurity is fortunately now abating thanks to the undeniable achievements on the ground by the Malian armed forces despite the challenges associated with that kind of operation. 
Despite the difficulties faced by MINUSMA due to the fact that the Mission is ill-suited to the security context, namely, peacekeeping in an environment in which there is no peace to keep, the Government of Mali had come to terms with the Mission’s passive presence. However, it became unacceptable for the Government of Mali to allow MINUSMA to continue to be part of the problem by exacerbating tensions among our communities and by exploiting the issue of human rights for political ends, thereby serving the foreign agendas of countries hostile to Mali.
After an in-depth assessment, in June the Government of Mali therefore requested the immediate withdrawal of MINUSMA. We are pleased that the Security Council accepted our request. The Government of Mali is working with MINUSMA for its orderly, coordinated and safe withdrawal by the set deadline of 31 December, in accordance with the relevant provisions of resolution 2690 (2023), adopted by the Security Council on 30 June. The Government of the Republic of Mali does not intend to extend that deadline.
The Government reassures the people of Mali and the international community that every measure has been taken to ensure the continuity of State services after the departure of MINUSMA. The first phase of the withdrawal process has been completed, and the second phase is already under way.
It is true that MINUSMA was not able to fulfil its mandate, but the Malian Government and people remain grateful for the efforts and sacrifices made over the past 10 years in Mali. I would like to pay tribute to the memory of all the victims, civilian and military. Malian and foreign, who fell on the field of honour in Mali.
However, the withdrawal of MINUSMA does not mean the end of cooperation between Mali and the Organization. On the contrary, my country is committed to its membership of the United Nations, and the Government remains committed to the principles and noble ideals of the Charter. Likewise. Mali renews its commitment to cooperating with all States in the world that so wish and that respect the fundamental principles of my country’s foreign policy.
In a spirit of national ownership, the Government is committed to pursuing the effective and judicious implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the Algiers process, together with our brothers in the signatory movements who so wish. We are delighted with the progress already made since the Agreement was signed in 2015, including the adoption of the new Constitution, which incorporates several of the Agreement’s provisions. From now on, the Government has decided to give priority to intra-Malian dialogue to further the peace process with the signatory groups.
The Government is aware of the challenges on the road to peace, such as the grisly series of indiscriminate terrorist attacks against civilians and members of the Malian Defence and Security Forces. The savage and barbaric attack on the boat Timbuktu and the assaults on camps in the towns of Bamba. Gao and Bourem between 7 and 12 September show the cruelty of those organized terrorist and criminal groups, which cowardly attack targets such as women and children. On behalf of the Head of State of Mali and the Malian Government and people. I would like to thank all the friendly nations and international organizations that have shown their compassion and their solidarity during those tragic events.
However, even given such tragic events, and at a time when the theme of our session calls on us for greater solidarity, it is regrettable that the Security Council has not reached a minimum consensus to, at the very least, condemn those barbaric acts. Despite such difficulties, or rather because of them, the Government 
of the Republic of Mali is more determined than ever to exercise its sovereignty, assert its authority — its full authority — over the entire national territory. The Defence and Security Forces will continue their offensive against obscurantist attacks, and the response will be immediate and resolute. That was recently the case in Bourem, where our brave soldiers repelled an attack by those criminal and obscurantist gangs by inflicting substantial losses on them.
As part of the drive to strengthen the State presence and authority, the State is committed to occupying all the areas vacated, or to be vacated, by MINUSMA. Contrary to certain allegations, the occupation of those sites, which complies in every respect with United Nations texts, in no way represents an act of belligerence towards the signatory movements by the Malian State. On the contrary, we continue to reach out to our brothers in the signatory movements for lasting peace and harmonious development for the benefit of our people. To that end, we call on the armed groups to distance themselves from, and cease the collusion observed with, the terrorist armed groups during the most recent attacks, in accordance with the peace agreement and the various relevant Security Council resolutions.
In the current geopolitical context. Mali does not wish to become a theatre of conflict or competition among the geopolitical interests of foreign Powers. We remain willing to cooperate with all partners that respect our sovereignty, our choice of partnerships and the interests of the Malian people.
In the regional and international context. Mali continues to pay close attention to ongoing developments in Africa and the rest of the world. With regard to global governance, the Government of the Republic of Mali reiterates its commitment to respecting the United Nations Charter, in particular respect for the sovereign equality of States and, consequently, its condemnation of the activities of certain Powers to perpetuate neocolonial domination and to subjugate other peoples, other countries and other nations.
Mali pays close attention to institutional developments and regrets the fact that the assessment of recent regime changes in some African countries is based on the closeness of the new leaders to certain Powers or, simply, on geopolitical interests, while completely ignoring the aspirations of the populations of the countries concerned.
In that regard, we condemn and reject the policy of double standards employed by certain Powers and some regional and even international organizations, including the United Nations. That inconsistency and manipulation serve only to undermine the credibility of our organizations in the eyes of the people and public opinion, thereby eroding their trust in those institutions, which are now perceived as having been hijacked from their primary purpose. Some organizations are used, outside any legal or community framework, as weapons against the countries and populations that have freely joined them, sometimes at the cost of transferring sovereignty. Such organizations therefore become instruments for perpetuating and imposing a neocolonial and hegemonic order.
In particular, we are following with great interest the developments in the Niger since 26 July. The people and the Government of Mali reiterate their solidarity with, and full support for, the Government and the people of the Niger, a neighbourly and friendly brother country. We condemn in principle the imposition of sanctions and unilateral coercive measures against any State, whether in Africa or elsewhere. We condemn sanctions all the more when they are unjust, illegal and inhumane, such as those that the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the West African Economic and Monetary Union imposed on the Niger and, before that, on my country. Mali, which has recovered. The humanitarian consequences of the sanctions on the Niger are so dramatic that the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator had to send a letter to the President of the ECOWAS Commission, calling on him to ease those measures. I must recall that even in the war waged between Iraq and the United States a humanitarian corridor was opened to allow supplies to be delivered to the Iraqi people. How is it that we in organizations founded on cooperation and fraternity can punish our own neighbours and brothers by preventing them from having food and medicines?
Furthermore. Mail remains strongly opposed to any military intervention by ECOWAS, which would have disastrous consequences for the Niger, as well as the entire region. Any military intervention in the Niger — I was going to say any aggression or invasion of that country — represents a direct threat to the peace and security of Mali and the region and will have serious consequences. We will not stand idly by. 
It is vital to avoid repeating the serious mistakes of the relatively recent past. Member States will recall that in 2011, despite the firm opposition and warnings of African leaders, the Security Council unfortunately decided to authorize a military intervention in Libya by NATO, the consequences of which have had a lasting destabilizing effect on that brother country and the entire region. NATO’s war in Libya is at the root of the spread of terrorism and violent extremism in the Sahel region, with all its innocent victims and destruction. That is why we will never tire of recalling the international responsibility for the human tragedy experienced by Libya and the Sahel since that intervention.
On behalf of all victims since 2011 to the present day, the tens of thousands of deaths and the millions of displaced persons and refugees, we therefore demand justice and reparation. But, above all, we demand that the international community assume its responsibilities and learn all the lessons from that risky military intervention by major Powers in a third country. It is crucial to avoid repeating in the Niger the serious mistakes made in Libya, which are at the very root of the deteriorating situation in the entire Sahel region, including Burkina Faso. Mali and the Niger. That is vital to restoring trust among nations, as per the theme of our session.
The many challenges to international peace and security call for the reform of the existing architecture of the United Nations. Mali reiterates its support for the legitimate demand of the African continent for reform of the Security Council so as to make it more representative of the realities of our time.
In the same vein. Mali will continue to advocate for reform of global economic, financial and political governance in order to create optimal and fair conditions for the participation of our countries in multilateral institutions. In that context. Mali reaffirms the central role that Africa must play within international organizations and institutions.
In that regard. Mali welcomes the opening up of the Brazil. Russia. India. China and South Africa (BRICS) alliance to new member States, including African States. The BRICS alliance and its mechanisms, including the bank, offer a flexible alternative tailored to the development needs of the countries of the global South. In the same vein, the recent expansion of the Group of 20 to include the African Union is an encouraging sign, but it is not enough. It is important that Africa’s participation in other international forums be stepped up in the name of justice and equity.
Climate change is a genuine threat to the current and future generations. We must have the courage to move beyond the prevailing dogmatism and narrow interests surrounding that issue. In that regard, the time has come to effectively implement the decisions of our summits and sessions of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. It is more important than ever that the countries responsible for climate change assume their full and complete responsibilities, including that of supporting the efforts of countries of the South to achieve development that respects the environment.
I would like to recall that the United Nations was established in 1945, as we know, primarily to save future generations from the scourge of war. That noble objective, enshrined in the United Nations Charter, is far from being achieved. Indeed, the current geopolitical tensions and multiple conflicts around the world are real causes for concern for multilateralism, peaceful coexistence and harmonious development. Let us take a break from the rhetoric of intimidation, threats and war. As the theme of this seventy-eighth session invites us to do, let us work together to restore trust and rekindle global solidarity. Let us dare to carry out reforms that help to build a world where everyone counts, a world where no one is left behind. Let us work together to put in place effective, fair and inclusive international mechanisms to resolve crises rather than encouraging or even, in certain cases, perpetuating them.
As direct victims of the ongoing interference of certain countries in their internal affairs, the people of Mali and several other Sahelian States are unfortunately continuing to suffer the tragic consequences of multidimensional crises imposed and perpetuated by those who paradoxically come to give lessons in democracy and respect for human rights.
In implementing the Head of State’s vision for the emergence of a new Mali, free from any external neocolonial domination, the Government of the Republic of Mali is honoured to be able to count on sincere partners and on countries that value equal relations based on mutual respect. In that regard. I would like to make a special mention of the Russian Federation for its active solidarity and reliable commitment, both bilaterally and multilaterally. 
Mali remains committed to strengthening African regional and subregional mechanisms that genuinely support the interests of the African people as a matter of priority. Faithful to its pan-Africanist mission, reaffirmed in all its successive constitutions. Mali reiterates its support for all relevant collective security mechanisms, particularly those in which African leadership is declared, as well as in those where manipulation is rejected and fought. That is the essence behind the establishment of the Alliance of Sahel States on 16 September by Burkina Faso. Mali and the Niger through the signing of the Liptako-Gourma Charter. That organization seeks to set up a collective defence and mutual assistance framework in order to combat all forms of aggression, terrorism and cross-border organized crime in the common area of the Alliance.
The new organization also seeks to federate the efforts of the three countries in the socioeconomic and financial fields, as well as strengthen regional integration on a new basis, this time an integration of peoples based on solidarity, respect for the dignity and identity of our peoples and our countries; the affirmation of our sovereignty over our lands and resources, as well as our sovereignty over our organizations; financing our activities from our own resources; and the rejection of external interference, hegemonic policies, neocolonial domination and subjugation.
In addition to security mechanisms. Mali fully supports African initiatives that strive to promote and strengthen ties of fraternity and solidarity, such as the African Political Alliance, launched by the sister Republic of Togo, which aspires to an independent, politically strong, unabashed and non-aligned Africa, capable of participating as an equal player as an actor in global governance. 
In conclusion. I would like to point out that the many challenges to peace, security and development require an overhauled, adapted and inclusive multilateral framework. We can, and must, no longer continue to do the same thing with the same ill-adapted mechanisms and institutions and expect different results. For its part. Mali remains committed to a multilateralism in which every nation counts, a cooperative multilateralism that provides ambitious solutions to the challenges of our time, particularly in the Sahel, an open multilateralism that takes into account the deep-seated aspirations of our populations to change, dignity, respect, the sovereign equality of States, equity, justice, development, security and, lastly, peace.