It is indeed a privilege to once again be addressing the General Assembly on behalf of the people of Malta.
As I was preparing my remarks. I was reminded of those timeless lines by the poet John Donne: “No man is an island, entire of itself; every man is a piece of the continent, a part of the main”. Malta is a proud island nation, but we are most definitely not an island entire of ourselves — quite the reverse. Throughout our history, we have looked outward to the world, conscious of our unique geographic position at the crossroads of Europe and Africa and consciously stepping up into a unique role, building bridges and building understanding between different traditions. Indeed, earlier this month, we were very proud to be just such a bridge, trusted by both sides to host private talks between the United States National Security Adviser and China’s Foreign Minister. Malta provided a safe space for vital discussions between the world’s two biggest Powers.
And it is to build bridges just like this that, almost 60 years ago, the Republic of Malta was admitted as a full Member of this United Nations. It is a sign of the confidence our fellow Members place in Malta’s commitment to working together for the common good that they elected our nation to serve on the Security Council for this year and next. It is why, embedded at the heart of our Constitution is the active pursuit of peace, security and social progress among all nations. Malta will always be open to the world. Malta will never turn its back on its neighbours. Malta will continue to work relentlessly with our partners in Europe and beyond to stand up for peace and the rule of law.
Sadly, the need to stand up for those values has rarely been more urgent or more important than it is today. We witness Russia’s violation of international law with its continued assault on Ukraine. Malta’s response to the situation in Ukraine and other crises across the world is guided by the values of neutrality enshrined in our Constitution. Malta’s neutrality does mean that we will continue to be directly opposed to military aggression and unilateral action against members of the global community and the rules-based order, but Malta’s neutrality does not mean that we are indifferent to what happens around us. We will never and can never be neutral when we see pain and suffering caused by an illegal invasion.
In that spirit of peace, we call on Russia to withdraw its forces from the sovereign territory of Ukraine and we urge all the nations gathered here to unite to deliver an end to the war. The tragedy of war is not just that those directly involved suffer, but also that the consequences reverberate around the world. The already precarious situation of global food security has been made much worse by the invasion of Ukraine. An estimated additional 122 million people across the world have been pushed into hunger since 2019. Malta urges Russia to rejoin the Black Sea Grain Initiative and to stop standing in the way of vital food supplies leaving Ukraine to feed the world’s most needy.
Being neutral has never meant that Malta ignores the problems facing our neighbours. We are acutely aware that many of the challenges we face at home are best tackled together with our Mediterranean neighbours. That is why I am very proud that our capital. Valletta, will host the next summit of the members of the European Union MED9 in just a few days’ time.
The most pressing issue in the Mediterranean is definitely that of Libya. The peace of our whole region depends on a lasting settlement there. Malta wishes to see a peaceful, stable and prosperous Libya through a Libyan-led political process. It is vital that the entire international community encourage the process and give the Libyan people the support they need to overcome the instability, for which they have already paid such a high price. The need to recover and rebuild after the tragic devastation of Storm Daniel underlines the urgency and importance of a lasting settlement that gives all Libyans the effective Government they deserve.
For Malta, being a good neighbour means offering practical help. Within hours of the disaster hitting, a team from our Army and Civil Protection Department was on the way to Libya to play its part in the rescue effort. Maltese officers also remain on active service with the United Nations in Lebanon, proudly wearing blue berets as part of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and underlining the importance Malta attaches to peacekeeping and peace-building in the Mediterranean. As the nation at the crossroads of Europe and Africa, our extended neighbourhood stretches beyond the Mediterranean coast. Our objective is to be a true bridge between the continents. My Government has underlined Malta’s commitment to Africa by opening new diplomatic missions in Ghana and Ethiopia and putting into action our first national strategy for Africa.
But strengthening connections does not just mean strengthening diplomatic ties. We have already concluded agreements with countries like Ethiopia to facilitate connectivity for businesses and people between the continents. Malta remains deeply disturbed by the dire security situation in the Sahel, including the political turmoil, irregular migration, the jihadist attacks on the civilian population and food insecurity. We are particularly concerned about the current situation in the Niger and underline the urgency of a peaceful resolution to the crisis.
From Ukraine to Mali. Libya to the Niger, it can all too often seem like we are living in an era of despair. And the problems the world faces are indeed deep and profound. It would be all too easy and all too understandable to fall into despondency and to think that nothing can be done. But in the rest of my remarks. I want to show that things can be done, that we can make a difference, and that if a small nation like Malta can play its part in addressing the most urgent issues 
our world faces, then the United Nations can put in place real and effective solutions globally.
I began with the famous quotation that “no man is an island”. Leaders cannot be an island, either. Our fine words to the Assembly must not stand alone; they must be directly connected to our actions at home and the priorities of our people. We must show through deeds, not just words, that we can address the fears, as well as the hopes and aspirations, of the people we represent.
One of the advantages of being Prime Minister of a small country is that you are very close to the people you represent. You hear loud and clear what is worrisome them. One of the persistent worries I hear is that people feel a niggling sense of insecurity. Post pandemic, they feel that the world is a less stable, increasingly scary place, and with such big global forces at play, too often citizens can feel like they do not have their hands on the levers that control their futures. I understand where those concerns are coming from. Addressing them is why I am into politics. It is why I am adamant that every global policy we put in place must make a difference locally and that we can show that by working together internationally, we can deliver solutions nationally. In that way, we can address what pessimists call the “new age of insecurity” by building a new age of security.
Yet, we must be realistic. There is no magic wand. I am realistic about what any individual nation can do, and I am acutely aware there is only so much a small nation can do. But if we all play our part, we can all make a difference. In short, we are stronger together. No one can feel secure about their family’s future unless they feel secure about the future of the planet on which we all live and the natural world on which we all depend.
The biggest threat to our planet is clearly climate change. Climate change is not some sort of abstract problem; it is a very real emergency the consequences of which are being felt in every part of the world. Current pledges and targets are not sufficient to keep the 1.5°C objective of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change within reach. Malta wholeheartedly commends the Secretary-General’s initiative to help States accelerate efforts at the global level. We must all play our part and work together. The time for excuses is long over.
Malta is a proud maritime nation. The sea plays a profound part in Malta’s national life and has a special place in the hearts of the Maltese people. Rising sea levels are a severe threat to the security, the livelihood and, indeed, the very existence of island countries like ours. Securing the future of our seas and oceans is an urgent imperative for the Government of Malta. That is why we have made climate and oceans the number one priority during our term on the Security Council. To give the debate new momentum, we made a high- level meeting on the implications of rising sea levels for peace and security the signature event of our presidency of the Security Council in February (see S/PV. 9260). And we enthusiastically extend our support for the newly created coalition on addressing sea-level rise and existential threats.
It is not just the direct consequences of rising sea levels that we need to be concerned about. As land is degraded, fresh water shortages, the displacement of people and food insecurity all risk undermining global security, generating new conflicts and exacerbating existing ones. Rising sea levels also threaten the very territorial integrity of States as a result of coastal inundation, with a consequent danger of disputes and conflict. I wish therefore to reiterate in the strongest terms, as I did at the twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, that no coastal State should lose any of its existing rights over its maritime zones due to rising sea levels. As a United Nations, we must preserve the sovereignty of coastal States, no matter what the ravages of the sea. As island nations, we turn to the world, but we do not turn our backs on each other. Solidarity among small island countries is a key value for Malta and a value that we turn into practical support.
Like the majority of nations in the United Nations. Malta was late to develop, and we have experienced many of the same challenges that are currently being faced by developing countries. That is why we have made raising awareness of the unique vulnerabilities of small island developing States (SIDs) a top priority and why supporting sustainable development for small island developing States is a cornerstone of our foreign policy. To do so, we are committed to our Island for Islands initiative, delivering concrete, practical support for those small island nations — the nations most exposed to the impact of climate change. We share best practices and help build capacity. We were delighted that Malta’s scholarship programme for students from small island developing States has been recognized with a United Nations SIDs Partnerships award.
Protecting our planet is a mammoth task, but by taking visible, measurable action we can, and we must. 
show our citizens that they have reason to believe in the security of the Earth’s future. There are those who say that securing the planet can be achieved only at the expense of economic growth. I firmly reject that thinking. In fact. I believe the reverse is true. Environmental security can be achieved only if citizens feel economic security. Only if you feel secure about your family’s economic well-being can you turn your attention to the well-being of the Earth. And it is only by delivering sustainable economic growth that we can deliver sustainable environmental protection.
From the perspective of an outward-facing, trading nation like Malta, there is one overwhelming, clear and present danger to economic security — the prospect of a new era of protectionism. If protectionism grows unchecked, it could do untold damage to an export- oriented island economy like ours. The Maltese people have benefited hugely from the opening up of the world economy. As vested interests have given way to innovation, they have seized the new opportunities. Like many young economies. Malta has harnessed digital technology and the breaking down of trade and tariff barriers to expand into sectors that were previously off- limits to small nations like ours.
What the world economy and the world’s citizens need is not a new era of protectionism. Instead, we need a new age of social protection —not putting up barriers to trade but putting in place standards and rights for our workers. I understand and appreciate how some people may feel left behind by the sheer pace of economic change this century. The pandemic showed the need to think through the geopolitical risks of supply chains. But the answer is not to turn back the clock. The answer is to get the future right. One of the themes of this year’s General Assembly is rebuilding trust to achieve sustainability for all, and that is exactly what we must do.
Too often, smaller and developing countries have been excluded from the decision-making process and have suffered as a result. Malta is clear — trust on trade can be achieved only if genuine solidarity is maintained with all Member States. Open trading should be fair trading. Open economies should be fair economies. Only with fairness will citizens’ sense of security be rebuilt. I came into politics passionate about building a country where decision-making is based on fairness and opportunity, with a commitment to equality that is also a commitment to competitiveness.
Let us consider gender equality. Empowering women powers economic growth. One of our Government’s proudest achievements is the introduction of free childcare that has enabled more parents to re-enter the workforce, increasing women’s economic power and increasing growth for the economy as a whole. I am proud to be speaking in the same month that Malta hosted a hugely successful EuroPride the crowning recognition of the transformation in our nation’s approach to LGBTIQ+ rights that has taken place since my party was returned to Government, and a huge boost to our island’ profile and our island’s economy.
And let us also look at closing the digital divide. Equipping more citizens of all ages and from all backgrounds with the digital skills they need both increases their individual earning power and adds to the nation’s productivity. That is why we have extended information and communications technology as a compulsory subject in all our upper secondary schools. Malta therefore calls on the international community to work harder to ensure that the digital divide is narrowed, not just within each nation but also globally.
Similarly, upholding the rights of the child — as enshrined in the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child — is of paramount importance to Malta. We work hard to ensure that each and every child has the opportunities she or he deserves, no matter what the circumstances of her or his birth. By tackling child poverty and ensuring equal access to education and healthcare, we aim to ensure that no child is left behind. Rightly, it is a moral imperative, but it is also an economic one. Leaving any of the next generation of workers without the skills they need is not just damaging to the individuals excluded from prosperity; it is also damaging to economic growth. None of us can feel secure unless every child in our societies is safe and secure.
One significant manifestation of the feeling of insecurity has been the growing number of people facing mental health difficulties. None of us can feel secure unless we know that mental health is taken as seriously as physical health by our health-care systems. Even if we do not have mental health issues ourselves, knowing that care and support are there should we or those we care for need it is part of the reassurance that an active State should provide. To help provide that reassurance, in Malta we have implemented a comprehensive mental health strategy to build capacity, address causes and offer continuing support to individuals with mental 
health needs and their families, through initiatives like the National Mental Health Helpline launched last year, offering a one-stop. 24/7 resource to connect patients with the services they need.
One of the biggest drivers of mental health worries is fear of the future. Indeed, none of us can feel secure about our lives if we do not feel secure about what is coming tomorrow. Right now, one of the biggest fears many have is of technology. We have lived through two decades of unprecedented change, from the basic mobile phone and text messaging to smart phones and face recognition. It can often seem like society has lost control and that the technology itself is in charge. And now, with the advent of generative artificial intelligence (Al), the risk is that this seems truer than ever. How we feel about our futures is, unfortunately, not helped by lurid media headlines about the machines taking over, spreading fear about Al taking jobs and rendering human effort obsolete. Let us be clear — Al will have a huge impact on all aspects of society, but let us also be clear that if as leaders we take the right decisions, that impact on our societies can be a positive one.
Again, as with trade, the answer is not to try and turn the clock back, to close our eyes to the inevitable and hope it will go away. Instead, the answer is to get the future right, to take the decisions now so that we can harness the power of Al for the public and common good, not fear it as a coming catastrophe. In Malta, we are already doing just that. We are already seeing how Al can enhance public services, improving lives for all citizens. We have six pilot projects covering areas from health care to traffic management. We are taking ownership through leadership, not trying to ignore the future. Naturally, however, there is a limit to what any one country especially a small one, can do. To make Al a global good, we need global action. Malta stands resolutely behind efforts to increase and enhance international cooperation on AL Technology is changing too fast, and its potential is so vast, that failing to work together is no longer an option.
Of course, it is not just in the tech field that we need to work together. Working together is not only a key value for Malta; it is at the very centre of the political tradition I proudly represent. Put simply, standing together, we can achieve so much more than working alone. Yes, none of us nations, leaders or societies stands as islands isolated from each other. We are all connected in ever more ways. We live in a new age — in an age when you can send a video to the other side of the world faster than you can walk to the other side of the room you are sitting in; in an age when the decisions about how to generate energy in one country can impact the very survival of another country oceans away; in an age when the aggression of one country against another can lead to hunger across a different continent. In such an age, the importance of working together will only become stronger.
The word for it — multilateralism — may not trip off the tongue, but it is more important than ever. To make multilateralism work in this age of insecurity, we need to ensure that a much wider group of voices are heard in the United Nations and around the globe; the voices of all countries — large and small, rich, and poor, developed and developing; the voices of all sections of civil society — women, not just men, young as well as old, gay as well as straight; all backgrounds, all ethnicities.
I refuse to believe, and Malta refuses to believe, that a new age of insecurity is inevitable. I know and Malta knows that we must build a new age of security, not by trying to turn the clock back but by getting the future right. If we work together; if we listen to and learn from each other; if we understand and appreciate the desire of our citizens to take back control of their lives, we can and we will get the future right.
