It is my true honour to be in this great Hall today and to address the General Assembly on behalf of Montenegro.
This year’s general debate theme depicts the key challenge lying before the United Nations as the rebuilding of trust and global solidarity. It also accelerates action on the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda. Indeed, achieving a sustainable and peaceful future requires our full attention and demonstrates our true commitment to a better world. I reaffirm and reiterate Montenegro’s strong support and commitment to the goals and principles of the United Nations, particularly in times like these, when global unity and solidarity are greatly needed.
To efficiently address global problems, we need wise leadership. Rather than uniting in joint efforts, most often we share only our joint concerns. Yet, the only way of tackling widespread crises is to be united in action. I believe that we can all agree that the ongoing geopolitical crisis represents a grave challenge to international peace and security and an alarming indicator of the need to fully return to the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations and to respect its binding character and the universality of its goals and 
principles — civilizational values on which the rules- based world order rests.
I assumed the position of President of Montenegro just four months ago, after our citizens made a resounding choice for change in the recent election. That marks an unprecedented level of support for a new era of our country's democratic development. It leaves me in no doubt about the political direction our citizens want to see: strengthening the rule of law, developing prosperity and ensuring social cohesion and equal opportunities. I am highly aware of how vital those objectives are in safeguarding our young democracy and freedom, especially at a time when de-democratization processes are becoming increasingly apparent worldwide. Let me particularly emphasize the importance of the rule of law as the key to unlock the economic potential and improve the living standards. Building truly democratic and independent institutions is crucial along that path. We are therefore committed to a zero tolerance on corruption and organized crime.
To better achieve our wider policy goals, we base our foreign policy on three key pillars: first, accelerating our integration into the European Union (EU); secondly, further strengthening the credibility of Montenegro as a NATO member; and thirdly, fostering the best possible relations with all our neighbours in the Balkans.
Montenegro is devoted to safeguarding lasting peace in the Balkans. Therefore. I have commenced my term by strengthening our friendships with our Balkan neighbours. We have also intensified the discussion with the European Union, thus extensively elaborating on the need for Montenegro’s speedy accession to the EU as the best possible signal to all other aspiring states that the EU perspective is still alive.
Following those principles, in the four months of my mandate, we have opened a meaningful dialogue with civil society and vulnerable communities with the aim of pursuing and ultimately achieving a truly inclusive society where nobody is left behind. Creating an environment of equal opportunities where life success is primarily determined by education and hard work is my goal. That is my story, which I believe can become and should become the story of Montenegro and the story of all of us.
I belong to a generation that was too young to witness the suffering caused by the wars that followed the dissolution of Yugoslavia, yet I think that I bear no less obligation to work on diminishing the still present consequences and thus preventing such tragic events from occurring again. To that end. Montenegro's strong commitment is to address the past without bias by calling things as they are, as the victims of those tragic events expect them to be called.
Notwithstanding the fact that we in Montenegro, as in many other democratic countries, often diverge on many political issues, we all agree that peace and prosperity, an equal and just society and friendly relations, particularly with our neighbours, have no alternative. We are proud of our democracy, but also grateful to our ancestors for having a State to protect and promote our interests abroad. We truly cherish freedom, and we stand united in that.
The same is what we hope from the world — to be united as ever before in defending democracy, human rights, freedom of choice and the rule of law, ensuring peace and prosperity, but above all, preserving human lives. In that context. I would like to reaffirm Montenegro’s clear-cut position in condemning Russia’s unprovoked and unjustified aggression and our firm support for Ukraine. Besides devastating Ukraine, the war has caused an energy, food, and financial crisis that has especially harmed the least developed countries in the world. To that extent, and in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant General Assembly resolutions, we share the desire for comprehensive, just and lasting peace in Ukraine.
There are still far too many places in our world where peace, stability, human rights and even basic necessities are not granted. We cannot be proud of that. The international community often emphasizes reactionary humanitarian responses rather than preventive ones. We need only think of the heartbreaking migratory crisis in the Mediterranean region.
The confluence of challenges we all face today serves as a formidable obstacle to the realization of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Despite those obstacles, there are constructive ways to move forward. To speed up progress towards achieving the SDGs, it is necessary to mobilize strong political commitment, improve financial resources and achieve closer cooperation. I believe that we should be honest and admit that the Sustainable Development Goals have proven to be a greater challenge than initially expected. 
requiring from all our countries additional and greater engagement and commitment.
The international community must increase its efforts to combat climate change with concrete actions. That includes the full implementation of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and addressing the interconnected crises of climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution.
By adopting the Rio Declaration in 1992. Montenegro became the world’s first ecological State. The Declaration defined Montenegrin strategic commitment to adopting and implementing the highest standards and norms in the field of environmental protection, nature conservation and sustainable development. We are proud of the fact that we were among the first countries to bring the SDGs commitment into the national framework through our Strategy of Sustainable Development. Another major step towards speeding up the implementation of the 2030 Development Agenda has been the establishment of the country’s SDG Acceleration Fund.
One particularly important fiscal and labour market reform resulted in the rise of the minimum wage and minimum pension. That was followed by other social security reforms, including the provision of free books to primary school students as well as a child allowance to all under 18. All those measures supported an environment of equal opportunities, thereby tackling one problem that was present in country for a long time — inequality.
In the spirit of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the landmark Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Montenegro confirms its strong commitment to respecting, protecting and promoting human rights. As a member of the Human Rights Council from 2022 to 2024, we are determined to further strengthen the role of that pivotal international forum in responding to situations of serious human rights violations and preserving the universality of international human rights law and the independence of the United Nations human rights system. Montenegro, as a secular State, takes great pride in our diverse and inclusive society, embracing various cultures and religions. Our notable achievement lies in fostering a harmonious and inclusive political environment. I am convinced that, in the near future, even the smallest minority groups, such as the Roma population, will secure their seats in the national Parliament.
We also call for a global response to the refugee and migrant crisis. In that regard, we must share the responsibilities we assumed in the global agreements we have adopted. We must cooperate in finding solutions and helping countries of destination, as well as countries of origin. Allow me to recall that Montenegro gave shelter to over 100.000 refugees and displaced persons during the wars in the former Yugoslavia, amounting to more than 20 per cent of our entire population. Also today, we have opened our doors to the biggest number of Ukrainian refugees per capita in Europe.
Let me emphasize that the protection of refugees, including their legal status and our decision to provide them with shelter as they flee devastating conflicts, has received unanimous support from the entire political spectrum. Moreover. Montenegrin society stands united in its commitment to upholding international law in that regard, even in the face of significant social pressure on our health care and education infrastructure.
Montenegro is firmly committed and determined to actively and constructively contribute and support collective efforts to preserve world peace and security. We strongly advocate for the role and work of United Nations peacekeeping missions. To that end, we will continue to strongly support a larger presence of Montenegrin military forces in peace missions under the auspices of the United Nations. We very much welcome the New Agenda for Peace, in which the Secretary-General outlines the very founding stones on which we should rebuild the new international system based on trust and solidarity.
Montenegro remains determined on the course of a Euro-Atlantic future, good-neighbourly relations and multilateralism. With that in mind, we have launched our candidacy for a non-permanent seat on the Security Council for the period 2026-2027. We ask for members’ support.
To conclude, as a European country, not only geographically but, more important, in terms of values and principles, we are convinced that the EU accession of Montenegro, as well as of the entire Western Balkan region, will further strengthen our position against the malicious influences of third parties, and ensure lasting peace and prosperity. Hence, the accession of Montenegro to the EU is not only a story significant for Montenegro itself, but would also provide a positive example to all aspiring countries, from the Balkans all the way to the east of Europe, that EU enlargement is alive and still possible.
