In 1864. Abraham Lincoln wrote a letter to Edwin Stanton, his Secretary of War. He observed that “you cannot escape the responsibility of tomorrow by evading it today”. It was a different time, with different problems and different ways of solving them.
A lot has changed since then, and yet Lincoln’s words remain as relevant as ever. They show that “responsibility” has always been a watchword, because our very future depends on whether we choose or refuse to take responsibility. Today there is no time to be lost. There has never been so much at stake at one time. We must combat climate change, fight hunger and poverty, and protect peace and security in many places all over the world.
It is human nature to prioritize the issues that affect us most directly. Let us be honest — that goes for all of us here today. Every one of us has come here to discuss the issues we face in our own countries, but if we look beyond our borders we see that none of those issues stands alone. All the big issues of our time intersect. Their impact is global. Let us consider climate change, or poverty, or conflict. Those issues are all related and we are all affected by them, though perhaps not always in the same way.
In Europe, peace has been shattered by Russian aggression. And yes. I am asking once again for support in ending that terrible war. At the same time. I realize that some here are thinking: “What about our own challenges? What about our own security? Will you support us there as well?” I understand how they feel, and they are right. As the late Secretary-General Kofi Annan put it. “If the United Nations is not as united as it should be, that is because it is a reflection of the world we live in”. And he was also right. For too long at the United Nations, some interests have weighed more heavily than others. The United Nations is structured as if it were still 1945, but the world has changed. It has taken a long time for that realization to sink in, but once you see it you cannot un-see it.
In this world at this time, we all need each other — all 193 countries — because we all face a common task. Let us consider the global distribution of wealth. The Netherlands is not only one of the United Nations most loyal development donors; we also support the reform plans of institutions such as the World Bank. Or let us consider climate change. We need to reduce our footprint — a footprint that leaves its mark on countries far beyond our borders. So that is what we are doing, by building a circular economy by 2050, by making our financial sector more sustainable and by combating deforestation and loss of biodiversity. In each of those areas, partnerships are essential — above all, partnerships with the countries hit hardest by climate change.
Today I will speak with the representatives of several small island developing States about climate adaptation and about ways of exchanging knowledge, expertise and innovative solutions. And yes, such partnerships begin with talking, but they must go beyond words and promises. The Netherlands is increasing its annual contribution to international climate finance to €1.8 billion by 2025, and over half of that will go to climate adaptation. Everyone understands how important that is.
In two months’ time we will gather in Dubai to take stock of our progress towards the Paris climate goals, but we already know that we are way off track, so something has to be done right now. The Netherlands will fulfil its responsibility, by providing 100 million people in developing countries with access to renewable energy by 2030, by massively scaling up our renewable energy investment and by helping to set up and scale up green-hydrogen corridors, together with South Africa. Egypt. Morocco. Namibia and others. Currently, only 2 per cent of global investment goes to Africa, despite the huge potential there. We have a collective interest in making sure that potential can be tapped, because if we do not help Africa to grow sustainably, we will all miss our climate goals. The twenty-eighth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change must mark a course correction. There, we must agree and explain how the world will get on track to meet the 1.5°C goal. If we do not, the consequences will be disastrous.
The examples I have offered of Dutch action, working together with our Kingdom partners in the Caribbean, show that we are willing to fulfil our responsibility, that we are willing to pick up the phone and to answer the knock at the door. The most striking of truths is also the most obvious: We are not as different as we might think. What unites us is bigger and stronger than what divides us. I see that in my bilateral discussions. I see it in the European Union, and I see it here at the United Nations. However different our backgrounds are, however different our 
countries, we share the same universal values: peace, freedom and justice.
On 17 July 2014, those values, which the Netherlands holds so dear, were trampled underfoot. It was the day that flight MH-17 was downed by Russia — the day the Dutch people and people everywhere were reminded, in such a painful manner, that peace, freedom and justice are not givens, but require our constant efforts. Those values, those collective aims, form the basis of the United Nations. They are the reason we are here today.
With that in mind. I would like to talk about Ukraine. Every day, millions of people feel the effects of Russia’s aggression — above all the Ukrainian people, who are the victims of terrible crimes. Every day they live in fear. Am I still safe in my own home? In my city? Will I ever see my family alive again? Those are questions that no one should ever have to ask. In Europe, we thought we would never need to ask them again, but we were wrong and so now it is up to us to respond, to pick up the phone and to answer the knock at the door. We cannot leave one country to fend for itself.
I know that some countries are hesitating, asking themselves why they should get involved in someone else’s war. To them. I say: “It is your war too, because even if there is no shooting in your towns and your cities are not being bombed, this war affects everyone”. People in vulnerable countries know exactly what I am talking about. The global food supply is being used as a weapon of war and food prices are soaring. Millions of people are being pushed back into poverty and hunger. And it is precisely the most vulnerable countries that are being hit the hardest. We will not find them on the official casualty list, but those countries and the people who live there are also victims of Putin’s aggression.
Russia’s conduct goes against everything that we in the United Nations stand for. That alone is reason enough to take action. The Charter of the United Nations, our common foundation, is very clear on that. When push comes to shove, we cannot neglect our duty because it is not convenient, because we have other things on our minds or because it seems too hard. No! No! No! The Charter is intended for moments like these for a time and a place like this. The General Assembly is the ultimate place and now is the time to hold each other to account and remind each other of our responsibilities. That goes for all of us, and it goes for me too. I have explained how the Netherlands will fulfil its responsibility. Members can hold us to that, and they can call us to account for our actions. In the same way. I am calling on everyone to speak out against Putin and Russia’s violation of the United Nations Charter, to support the peace plan, to support Ukraine, even if it takes time and even if there are setbacks — especially if it takes time and there are setbacks — and to tell Russia to give back the stolen children of Ukraine.
Some countries feel they are supporting peace in Ukraine simply by calling for an immediate ceasefire. They think that this will help end the war and that peace, freedom and security will return automatically. They see it as an expression of nuance. They want to see the good in others. They do not want to point the finger of blame. In the case of the war in Ukraine, there is no shared blame. There is no doubt about who the perpetrator is and who the victim. Russia attacked Ukraine, a sovereign nation, and not the other way round. So there can be no shared solution. Russia is the aggressor here and it is not Ukraine’s supporters who are prolonging the war — it is Russia. Putin has occupied 20 per cent of Ukraine. An immediate ceasefire now would mean victory for Russia. That is the reality, and a just and lasting peace can be achieved only if we recognize that reality.
There is a lot at stake here. Putin is counting on us being divided. He is counting on us ending our support as the war drags on longer and costs more than we thought. He is counting on us losing interest and returning to our own problems. That is Putin’s strategy. And now that push has come to shove, we must show that we have learned from the past, that we will all pick up the phone, that we will all answer the knock at the door and that we will all fulfil our responsibility.
