The United Nations was founded on a simple, yet paradigmatic vision — a world governed by law, a world coming together to promote social progress and better standards of life, a world respectful of the dignity and worth of every human being and a world where problems are solved through 
international cooperation. The generation articulating that vision had just endured the Second World War. They had, in the words of the Charter of the United Nations, experienced “untold sorrow” — death and destruction on an unprecedented scale. As we consider the multitude of challenges facing our generation, we can find inspiration in the visionary perspectives that led to the establishment of this Organization — the pursuit of a better future and the commitment to seeking it together.
Norway is a staunch supporter of the United Nations. The principles of the Charter are of fundamental importance to us. They are the basis of our security. They are a critical foundation for our prosperity. They guide our approach to international problem-solving and, for a small country such as ours, there is no viable alternative. Respect for international law is a core national interest for Norway.
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine is therefore of great concern to us. Let me use this opportunity to explain why. Russia is our neighbour. It is responsible for a blatant breach of the United Nations Charter. It has violated fundamental principles of international law. It has created a grave international crisis — a permanent member of the Security Council seeking to deny the right of another State Member of the United Nations to exist, launching an unprovoked and illegal war, conducting that war in the most brutal manner, with complete disregard for human life and the rules of war, and occupying the largest nuclear power plant in Europe, thereby risking a grave nuclear incident.
Norway has spoken out against that war. We have provided extensive civilian, military and humanitarian support to Ukraine, and will do so for as long as it takes. We are actively supporting President Zelenskyy’s peace formula in the understanding that the pursuit of peace is important, but on terms defined by Ukraine — the victim of an illegal aggression. At the same time, we are also maintaining our strong engagement at the global level. We are assisting countries that are affected by the repercussions of the war, and we will continue to do so.
The war taking place on the European continent is a watershed moment for Norway and for the rest of the world. It is an attack on the basic principles of the United Nations Charter, with global ramifications. Food insecurity has increased dramatically. Energy supplies are under pressure. Inflation has soared. Russia’s war against Ukraine has exacerbated a global, negative economic spiral. It is jeopardizing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, while also diverting attention from other pressing issues. That is deeply concerning. This decade is of critical importance to humankind, our environment and our planet. We simply cannot fail to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the Paris Agreement targets. We cannot afford to let the window of opportunity close. We must act now.
Norway is doing its part. We have enhanced our climate target and will cut emissions by at least 55 per cent by 2030, as compared to the 1990 levels. We are increasing carbon taxes. We are expanding the uptake of zero-emission technologies in the transport sector. We are investing heavily in offshore wind, carbon capture and storage and a green industrial future. We are actively participating in the climate negotiations and will go to the twenty-eighth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Dubai with the aim to keep the 1.5°C target alive.
In Glasgow, we announced that we would double our climate financing by 2026. I am pleased to report that we have already achieved that. Over the past 15 years. Norway has provided more than $5 billion in support to tropical forest countries. We will continue to provide a high level of funding under that initiative up to 2030.
On Thursday this week, my Prime Minister co-chaired a meeting of the Global Leadership Council for the Global Energy Alliance for People and Planet (GEAPP). Together with philanthropists, multilateral development banks and other partners, we will work to unlock renewable energy access in emerging economies, creating an energy system for the future, reducing emissions, facilitating job creation and, not least, improving energy access for the 3.6 billion people currently living in energy poverty. Through GEAPP, as well as Norway’s Climate Investment Fund, we have mobilized significant investments. In 2024, we will launch a dedicated guarantee instrument for developing countries to encourage further private investments in renewable energy.
Food security is part and parcel of the climate agenda and a defining challenge of our time. Achieving food security is essential to achieving the SDGs. Too many people lack access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food. In response. Norway has geared up its efforts to combat food insecurity by providing $500 million this year for developing countries to offset the global ramifications of the war in Ukraine and by placing food security at the heart of our development policy. We are investing in small-scale producers. We have increased our efforts to combat food loss and waste. Those are important steps, not just because they will improve food security, but because we must transform the food system if we are to reach our climate goals.
The sustainable use of the oceans is part of the Norwegian DNA. Norway’s Prime Minister is co-Chair of the High-level Panel for a Sustainable Ocean Economy. I am pleased to report that the Panel’s 18 Member States will develop sustainable ocean plans by the time of the United Nations Ocean Conference in 2025.
I am also encouraged that so far more than 75 States, with Norway as one of them, has signed the Agreement on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biodiversity in Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction. That is an important step towards improving ocean governance and cooperation. It shows that the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea can adapt to meet evolving challenges, and it demonstrates the continuing strength and promise of multilateralism despite geopolitical tensions.
The coronavirus disease pandemic had devastating consequences for people, communities, health systems and economies across the world. It was a global wake-up call. We must better prepare for the next pandemic. Safeguarding global public health requires close, broad-based international collaboration. It requires financing as well as investments in universal health coverage. We support the development of a pandemic accord at the World Health Organization, and we call for rapid agreement on an interim mechanism on medical countermeasures.
We are all familiar with the dividends of peace. Yet, as a community, we have long underestimated the value of conflict prevention. I would therefore like to thank the Secretary-General for setting out his New Agenda for Peace. We agree wholeheartedly with the emphasis on preventive diplomacy.
In a fractured world, with rising geopolitical tensions, it is critical that we seek common ground where we can find it, that we invest in dialogue and that we strive to understand each other, however deep disagreements may seem. Dialogue is essential. Without dialogue, we have fewer opportunities to influence, encourage or simply explore political solutions in situations of conflict. Dialogue is at the heart of diplomacy. It is a basic tool for solving problems and for realizing the vision on which the United Nations is built.
We welcome renewed regional dialogue in the Middle East. Signs of de-escalation and intensified diplomatic activity among the countries of the region are very welcome. We remain committed to seeking peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians despite concerning developments and, in this thirtieth anniversary year of the Oslo Accords, encourage much greater efforts towards creating a viable Palestinian State.
As guarantor in Colombia, we support the peace agreement with the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia and the ongoing negotiations between the Government and the Ejercito del Pueblo. We are maintaining our engagement in the Horn of Africa by providing substantial humanitarian support and a standing offer to assist parties looking for political solutions. In Afghanistan, we engage the de facto authorities in Kabul. If that can help to address the dire humanitarian situation, especially for women and girls, who are being deprived of education and a future, it is worth the attempt.
Human rights are at the core of this Organization. They articulate a binding agenda for fulfilling human potential. They are integral to the Sustainable Development Goals. They are instrumental in realizing almost any policy objective. Societies prosper when women and girls participate on an equal footing and are free to exercise their sexual and reproductive health and rights. Good solutions are identified where ideas can be articulated freely. Sustainable economic growth requires the rule of law.
The point is that the case for human rights is solid, whether approached from values, from the law or more instrumentally. We all should therefore be concerned that standards are slipping in many places. That has to stop. As Governments, human potential is our most precious resource. We cannot afford to waste it. Let me say to those who are taking risks and are standing up for human rights and democracy, to civil society, to lawyers, to journalists and to human rights defenders that they are making the world a better place. They have our support. 
I began by referencing the establishment of this Organization. A critical moment in world history, it was the beginning of an era of institutionalized international cooperation, of rights and responsibilities and of a shared agenda to improve the human condition. That agenda is as important as ever and, as Member States, it is our task to find ways to make progress. We listen attentively to proposals for renewal, for innovation and for creativity. The General Assembly is the world’s most important forum for dialogue and discussion. We are thankful that it exists, so let us get to work finding common ground, solving problems across borders, revitalizing the 2030 Agenda and honouring our international obligations and commitments.
