At the outset, we would like to express our warm congratulations to Mr. Dennis Francis and his friendly country. Trinidad and Tobago, on his election to preside over the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session. We also express our great appreciation to Mr. Csaba Korosi of the friendly nation of Hungary, the President of the Assembly at its previous session, for his efforts and good management. And we would like to convey our greetings and respect to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his laudable work to promote and achieve the purposes and principles outlined in the Charter of the United Nations and the values of justice and peace worldwide, as well as to fulfil the Sustainable Development Goals and enhance effective international cooperation in addressing the common challenges facing our world. We reaffirm Oman’s firm commitment to cooperating with the international community in that regard.
Dialogue is a steadfast principle and a successful approach for the Sultanate of Oman in its foreign policy, given its effectiveness in achieving reconciliation, consensus and peace among all parties to conflicts and all nations generally. In that regard, we would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm Oman’s unwavering commitment to engaging with the international community in its pursuit of a peaceful global system based on justice, fairness and respect for the Charter, international law and the sovereignty of nations, as well as non-interference in their internal affairs. We urge the international community to remain committed in that regard to the United Nations system as a means for settling disputes and resolving conflicts, and to use dialogue in order to arrive at peaceful solutions and negotiate to realize a world characterized by dignified living, prosperity, stability, security and peace.
We are linked to the United Nations and all other countries by the unity of the purposes and principles through which we achieve our goals. By the grace of God, we will continue to support the truth and just causes, and the Palestinian question stands at the forefront of enduring causes, with a people who have suffered injustice that has lasted more than 70 years. The Palestinian people, however, have stood firm in confronting Israel’s brutal occupation, siege and oppression and its violations of international law and Security Council resolutions. Like all other peace-loving nations and communities, we see no alternative for a settlement of the issue other than a two- State solution such as is outlined in the parameters and resolutions of international legitimacy, including the Arab Peace Initiative. The United Nations has a moral and legal responsibility to find a just and equitable solution to the question that can ensure an end to the dire suffering endured by the Palestinian people and the restoration of their legitimate rights to freedom and self-determination. That includes the withdrawal of Israel from the territories occupied after 1967 and the establishment of an independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The ramifications surrounding the Russian- Ukrainian crisis and the escalating security and military situation there, as well as the painful humanitarian consequences, pose a significant threat to international peace and the flow of energy and food supplies, as well as representing a serious challenge to international cooperation and the global system based on respect for the law and the Charter. My country therefore calls for dialogue and peaceful negotiations based on harming no one, as well as respect for State sovereignty, good- neighbourliness and sincere efforts to address the root causes of the crisis.
The Sultanate of Oman is actively implementing various plans and programmes aimed at adapting to climate change and mitigating its effects. We are also working to promote investment in renewable energy projects, in line with our 2050 carbon-neutral strategy. My country is committed to participating actively in the upcoming session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, scheduled to take place in November in Dubai. Oman’s Vision 2040 serves as a gateway for my country towards promoting sustainable development, overcoming challenges and keeping pace with regional and global change.
The ongoing modernization of the educational system at all stages and improving its outcomes are key 
to the development of human beings and enabling them to advance economic development.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic brought lessons for all States and societies, making it necessary for them to review preparations and response mechanisms to health-care emergencies, with a view to promoting their capacities in that regard. Perhaps one of the most important lessons drawn relates to the need for early preparedness in addressing public health risks and threats along with investing in scientific research and technological development.
My country held a global conference at the ministerial level with the aim of devising solutions to antibiotic resistance and accelerating cooperation at the national, regional and international levels in order to reduce that threat to public health and to States’ economic capacities.
We would also invite all States to encourage partnership in the areas of research, innovation and industry in order to develop preventive and treatment alternatives to reduce the effects of epidemics and stop their spread.
My country is seriously determined to bolster human rights and promote the relevant international treaties and conventions with a view to bringing about an international community that is fair and has absolute respect for the dignity and rights of all human beings and for the religious and cultural values of States. 
In that context, my country rejects and condemns all acts of incitement to violence, hatred and discrimination based on religion or race. We call on the international community to adopt clear and explicit legislation that criminalizes such acts, which pose a threat to social peace and security and even to the national security of States and societies.
We are currently grappling with complex challenges worldwide. Those challenges include the exacerbation of climate change, the spread of epidemics and the trafficking of drugs and human beings, in addition to political and sectarian conflicts. We therefore call on the family of nations to firmly uphold the principles of rights and justice and to implement international law, without any double standards, so that security and safety can prevail among peoples and trust among States, and so that partnerships among peoples can develop and prosper.
In conclusion, we would like to wish the General Assembly every success at this session.
