On behalf of the Government and the people of Pakistan. I convey to Mr. Dennis Francis our warm congratulations on his election to guide the work of this historic session of the General Assembly. I am confident that his vast diplomatic experience and the sunny disposition of his beautiful island country will enable him to steer the Assembly to a most successful conclusion.
We are meeting at a tense and pivotal moment in modern history. Conflicts rage in Ukraine and in 50 other places around the world. Tensions among the global Powers have continued to escalate. We see the rise of new and old military and political blocs. Geopolitics are resurgent when geoeconomics should have primacy in the world. The world cannot afford Cold War 2.0. There are far greater challenges confronting humankind that demand global cooperation and collective action.
The world’s economic prospects also appear gloomy. Global growth is slow. High interest rates could trigger a recession. A succession of exogenous shocks — the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), conflict and climate change — has devastated the economies of many developing countries. Many countries of the global South have barely managed to stave off defaults. Poverty and hunger have grown, reversing the development gains of three decades.
At yesterday’s Sustainable Development Goals Summit, far-reaching commitments were made to implement the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). We must ensure the implementation of the SDG Stimulus, the re-channelling of unused special drawing rights for development, the expansion of concessional lending by the multilateral development banks, and the resolution of the debt problems of the 59 countries in debt distress.
Pakistan also looks forward to the fulfilment of the climate change commitments made at the twenty-eighth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change by the developed world to provide over $100 billion in annual climate finance; allocate at least half of such finance to adaptation in developing countries; operationalize the Fund and funding arrangements for loss and damage; and accelerate their carbon emission mitigation targets to keep alive the goal of restricting global warming to 1.5 °C. Attempts to selectively provide those funds on the basis of geopolitical considerations should be resisted.
Pakistan’s triple food, fuel and finance challenge is a prime illustration of the impacts of COVID-19, conflicts and climate on developing countries. Pakistan is one of the countries worst affected by the impacts of climate change. The epic floods of last summer submerged a third of our country, killed 1.700 people and displaced over 8 million, destroyed vital infrastructure and caused over $30 billion in damage to Pakistan’s economy. Pakistan is gratified by the commitments of over $10.5 billion for Pakistan’s comprehensive plan for recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction with resilience — the 4RF Plan — at the Geneva Conference in January. Specific projects are being submitted to ensure the timely funding and execution of the 4RF Plan. I hope that our development partners will accord priority to the allocation of funds for our resilient recovery plan, which has been costed at $13 billion.
Pakistan’s Government is committed to rapid economic recovery. We will stabilize our foreign exchange reserves and our currency, expand domestic revenues and, most importantly, mobilize significant domestic and external investment. To that end, we have established a Special Investment Facilitation Council to expedite investment decisions. Twenty eight projects have been identified in priority sectors — agriculture, mining, energy and information technology — for implementation in collaboration with Pakistan’s partners.
Pakistan’s long-term shift to geoeconomics is well under way. The second phase of the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor has been initiated, covering railway, infrastructure and manufacturing projects. Pakistan also looks forward to the early implementation of connectivity projects with Central Asia.
Development depends on peace. Pakistan is situated in one of the least economically integrated regions of the world. Pakistan believes that regions develop together. Therefore. Pakistan desires peaceful and productive relations with all our neighbours, including India. Kashmir is the key to peace between 
Pakistan and India. The Jammu and Kashmir dispute is one of the oldest issues on the agenda of the Security Council. India has evaded implementation of the Security Council’s resolutions, which call for the final disposition of Jammu and Kashmir to be decided by its people through a United Nations-supervised plebiscite.
Since 5 August 2019. India has deployed 900.000 troops in illegally occupied Jammu and Kashmir to impose the final solution for Kashmir. To that end. India has imposed extended lockdowns and curfews, jailed all the genuine Kashmir leaders, violently suppressed peaceful protests, resorted to extrajudicial killings of innocent Kashmiris in fake encounters and so-called cordon-and-search operations, and imposed collective punishments, destroying entire villages. Access to occupied Kashmir, demanded by the United Nations High Commission for Human Rights and over a dozen special rapporteurs, has been denied by New Delhi.
The Security Council must secure the implementation of its resolutions on Kashmir. The United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan should be reinforced. Global Powers should convince New Delhi to accept Pakistan’s offer of mutual restraint on strategic and conventional weapons.
Peace in Afghanistan is a strategic imperative for Pakistan. Pakistan shares the concerns of the international community with respect to Afghanistan, particularly the rights of women and girls. Yet, we advocate continued humanitarian assistance to a destitute Afghan population, in which Afghan girls and women are the most vulnerable, as well as the revival of the Afghan economy and the implementation of the connectivity projects with Central Asia. Pakistan’s first priority is to prevent and counter all terrorism from and within Afghanistan. Pakistan condemns the cross-border terrorist attacks against Pakistan by the Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan. Da’esh and other groups operating from Afghanistan. We have sought Kabul’s support and cooperation to prevent those attacks. However, we are also taking necessary measures to end that externally encouraged terrorism.
Pakistan welcomes the progress made towards ending the conflicts in Syria and Yemen. In particular, we warmly welcome the normalization of relations between the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Islamic Republic of Iran. Unfortunately, the tragedy of Palestine continues, with Israeli military raids, airstrikes, the expansion of settlements and evictions of Palestinians. Durable peace can be established only through a two- State solution and the establishment of a viable and contiguous Palestinian State within the pre-June 1967 borders, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.
United Nations peacekeeping has been a success story. Over more than six decades. Pakistan has contributed 230.000 peacekeepers to 47 missions across the world. Today United Nations peacekeepers face complex and unprecedented challenges, especially from criminal and terrorist groups, as in the Sahel. We must ensure the safety and security of peacekeepers. Pakistan shall continue to work with the United Nations to develop the capabilities and more robust mandates required for successful enforcement actions by United Nations and international forces where needed.
We must counter all terrorists without discrimination, including the rising threat posed by far- right extremist and fascist groups, such as Hindutva- inspired extremists threatening genocide against India’s Muslims and Christians. We also need to oppose State terrorism; address the root causes of terrorism, such as poverty, injustice and foreign occupation; and distinguish genuine freedom struggles from terrorism. Pakistan proposes the creation of a committee of the General Assembly to oversee the balanced implementation of all four pillars of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.
Our progress, based on a rich history of cooperation, understanding, exchange and the synthesis of ideas among civilizations, is imperilled today. The narratives advocating a clash of civilizations have done considerable harm to humankind’s progress. Such ideas have bred extremism, hatred and religious intolerance, including Islamophobia. Let us make no mistake; it is a latent threat that undermines millenniums of progress. We need to cherish and celebrate our diversity and different ways of life. Mutual respect and the sanctity of religious symbols, scriptures and personages should be ensured. While Islamophobia is an age-old phenomenon, after the 9/11 terrorist attacks it has assumed epidemic proportions, as manifested in the negative profiling of Muslims and attacks on Islamic sites and symbols, such as the recent public burnings of the Holy Qur’an.
Last year, the Assembly adopted resolution 76/254, proposed by Pakistan on behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), declaring 15 March as the International Day to Combat Islamophobia. Earlier this 
year, the Human Rights Council adopted OIC resolution 53/1, submitted by Pakistan, urging States to outlaw the burning of the Holy Qur’an and similar provocations. We welcome the legislation initiated by Denmark and contemplated by Sweden towards that end. Pakistan and the OIC countries will propose further steps to combat Islamophobia, including the appointment of a special envoy, the creation of an Islamophobia data centre, legal assistance to victims and an accountability process to punish Islamophobic crimes.
The complex global and regional challenges that the world faces today can be best addressed through effective multilateralism within the framework of the United Nations. However, multilateralism is being eschewed due to the unilateral policies of and strategic rivalry and tensions among global Powers. Pakistan will continue to work actively to strengthen multilateral institutions and enhance global cooperation.
Pakistan looks forward to continuing negotiations on the scope and elements of the Summit of the Future and the pact for the future, building on the convergences that emerged in earlier consultations. The Summit’s preparatory process must not disrupt existing negotiating processes, such as the intergovernmental negotiations on the reform of the Security Council.
Pakistan does not believe in elitism within the comity of nations. The United Nations Charter principles of equality and sovereignty must be preserved in the interest of global peace and prosperity. Pakistan believes that adding additional permanent members to the Security Council would further erode its credibility and legitimacy. The widest possible agreement can be best achieved on the basis of the Uniting for Consensus group’s proposal for expansion of the Council only in the non-permanent category, with provision for a limited number of longer-term seats.
Pakistan believes that to build, preserve and promote peace and prosperity today and in the future, it is vital to reduce great power rivalry and tensions, ensure strict adherence to the United Nations Charter, consistently implement Security Council resolutions, eliminate the root causes of conflicts and respect the principles of the non-use of force, self-determination; sovereignty and territorial integrity, non-interference in the internal affairs of States and peaceful coexistence. Pakistan will work diligently and actively with all Member States to realize those vital elements of a new, equitable and peaceful world order.
