I congratulate President Francis on his election. As a fellow islander, he is well acquainted with the challenges common to all small island developing States (SIDS), from economic resilience and climate change to financing and security. We all look forward to working with him over the next year to meet those challenges.
We thank Secretary-General Guterres again for his tireless efforts and advocacy for a more secure, prosperous and sustainable world, which is our ultimate goal and what brings us together today.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is a universal call to action. As a small island developing State. Palau faces economic challenges related to our small population. We are vulnerable to climate change. We struggle with the high cost of imported foods and goods, face infrastructure challenges due to our remote location. Those shared issues highlight the unique challenges faced by SIDS in our pursuit of sustainable development and a better life for our people.
Like other SIDS. Palau is working to build a diverse and resilient economy. We are looking to the digital world, which relies not on land mass but on our determination to succeed. That new perspective is borne out of a harsh lesson learned when the punches started coming about seven years ago. In 2016. Palau’s economy, heavily reliant on tourism, had a significant downturn. In one year, we lost 13 per cent of our tourism. By 2019, the numbers had dropped a further 47 per cent. In fact, when the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) hit in 2021, that number fell to a mere 3.400 visitors, representing a 98 per cent decrease from the 2015 numbers.
I share those figures to underscore our susceptibility to external influences and the profound impact they have on our national economy. Already suffering from the drop in tourism. Palau was hit hard by the worldwide delay of goods caused by the pandemic. Factories shut down and logistical challenges led to delays in the delivery of equipment and supplies. Prices soared. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine further aggravated the situation, causing gas prices to skyrocket.
The economic downturn experienced by Palau underscores the interconnectedness of our global community. If tourism challenges and COVID-19 were the one-two punch, the inflated cost of goods could have very well knocked us out. Luckily for us, we had the help and support of partners. The invasion of Ukraine by Russia, although geographically distant, had a ripple effect that led to the inflation of prices in Palau. That situation raises the importance of security and how destabilizing conflict can be to world order.
There are Palauans today who survived a war that was not of their own making, only to suffer the ripple effects of another. Current events serve as a stark reminder of the urgent need for peace and stability worldwide. We unequivocally condemn Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and call for an immediate cessation of hostilities. Similarly, we urge the United Nations and all parties involved in the Taiwan Straits to exercise restraint and seek a peaceful resolution to reduce tensions. The well-being and prosperity of nations and their economies are intrinsically linked to global peace and stability.
For the past two years, we have been striving to build a resilient economy amidst external pressures. A significant challenge has been outmigration. Since 1994, when we gained our independence, nearly half our population has left to seek new opportunities beyond our shores. That brain drain has not only reduced local capacity but also hindered growth. We are grateful to partner nations, including the United States. Japan. Taiwan. Australia and others, that provide assistance and training to assist with capacity and upskill the local population as well. We are also encouraged by discussions to promote economic investments that can potentially create job opportunities that can help discourage outmigration and promote economic growth.
Climate change is the most significant challenge to our progress towards achieving sustainable development. The impacts are evident in our coastal 
areas, agricultural lands, marine resources, cultural heritage and, most important, our livelihoods. Assistance in mitigating and adapting to those impacts is crucial to our continued progress and survival. In my youth. I would spearfish on the reef with my father, helping to provide for our family. There was one remote island in Palau’s southern waters where we would go. It was alive with birds, turtles, fish, and clams. Recently. I revisited that island with my children, witnessing turtles laying eggs. The island had diminished in size by two-thirds due to sea-level rise. Sadly, half of the turtle eggs laid that night were in the tidal zone and unlikely to survive. That heart-wrenching reality mirrors the fate of our homes and cultures if we fail to take decisive action.
We urgently call on the Group of 20 (G-20) nations, responsible for 80 per cent of global carbon emissions, to uphold their commitments to the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and to limit warming to 1.5°C. That is crucial to mitigating such climate change impacts like disappearing islands and unhatched turtle eggs. As major emitters. G-20 nations have a crucial role to play in emission reduction and leading the path towards sustainable development. We urge the United Nations to simplify access to multilateral funds for SIDS and other vulnerable communities, promoting a faster transition. We call on the international community to work with SIDS to increase access to climate finance. We believe that it is time that we change the metrics we use to determine how we access those funds by using a better, multi-vulnerability index.
However, we must ensure that commitments pledged here are acted upon and not forgotten. We have a saying in Palau: Ng ko er a teribsel a daob —“Let us not be like the foam riding on the waves of the ocean, drifting without settling.” That Palauan saying refers to meetings where much is said but afterwards no action is taken.
Despite those challenges, we acknowledge the progress that has been made. The twenty-sixth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Glasgow and the twenty-seventh Conference in Sharm-al-Sheik were successful, leading to green domestic policies in some of the world’s largest economies. We appreciate the support of nations opposing and placing a moratorium on deep-sea mining. Proponents argue that seabed minerals aid renewable transition, but the reality is we lack knowledge about potential impacts on underwater ecosystems that devastating activity could have. We know that disturbing the ocean bed could release stored carbon dioxide, directly setting back our efforts to combat climate change. We advocate for a global deep- sea mining moratorium, adhering to the precautionary principle of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
On a positive note, tomorrow Palau will sign the international legally binding instrument under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond areas of national jurisdiction. Universal participation is crucial, especially on the part of developed countries that can provide implementation means and engage in areas beyond national jurisdiction activities. This moment signifies global unity in protecting high seas biodiversity.
Palau also takes this opportunity to second United States President Joseph Biden’s call for Security Council reform. We believe that such reform would introduce fresh perspectives and allow nations like Japan a permanent seat in the Council, which has seen little change since its establishment in 1945. We also propose considering the abolishment of veto powers, which can obstruct effective United Nations action. The upcoming Summit of the Future in 2024 and the eightieth anniversary of the United Nations in 2025 present fitting opportunities to demonstrate progress in the Security Council.
We also advocate for change regarding the Republic of China on Taiwan, which has been unjustly excluded from United Nations processes despite its remarkable leadership and innovative solutions. Taiwan has collaborated with Palau on vital issues such as tourism, agriculture, ocean conservation, climate, gender equality, education and innovation. We urge the United Nations to allow Taiwan’s meaningful participation in crucial specialized agencies and processes like the World Health Organization, the International Civil Aviation Organization and the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Taiwan’s 23 million people have much to offer the world. The Charter of the United Nations affirms the equal rights of all peoples and nations. We urge the United Nations to uphold that vision by allowing Taiwan to participate and contribute.
Our world is under siege from war and climate change, threats that undermine sustainable development and have driven many into poverty. The Ukraine crisis 
exemplifies this, with lives lost, property destroyed and essential supplies disrupted. Those crises are not distant threats but harsh realities affecting millions, including those in the Pacific islands. We must act now to improve life across our shared ocean and world.
The Palauan story of Tebang teaches us the power of unity. Tebang and his friends went to the forest to fell a large tree, to be carved into a canoe. Unfortunately, the log ended up in a taro swamp. Unable to move it. Tebang went home to consult his father, who gave him a chant. He returned with all his friends, and together they chanted HkamuuF or “It can move!” They began pulling in unison, which allowed the log to be pulled from the swamp to the shoreline to be carved into a canoe. Just as Tebang and his friends moved the log, we too can move mountains if we speak and act together. Our task may be daunting, but remember: “IkamuuF We can move towards a sustainable future where our grandchildren can breathe clean air, swim in pristine seas, live in peace and prosper.
So let us raise our voices together and chant our own “/kamuuF Let us move this world towards a better tomorrow. Together, we are unstoppable. Together, we can ensure a thriving planet for generations to come. Let us seize this moment with unity and determination. Let us unite for a better tomorrow, because together, we can move. We are truly stronger together.
