The world as we know it is enduring profound and rapid transformations under the impact of the many challenges that humankind must face. At the same time, against that very difficult background, we continue to defend our core values, the Charter of the United Nations and effective multilateralism. Our decisions are critical for the future of humankind. We, the leaders, are called upon now to take decisive actions for the generations to come, in a spirit of solidarity and shared responsibility, and to stand up for the rules-based international order and full respect for international law.
Romania is a direct neighbour to the continued war of aggression of Russia against Ukraine. And we have acted, with all our energy, to make a solid contribution to regional and international security and stability. That war has demonstrated that the Black Sea needs more global attention, as it is of strategic importance for transatlantic security. Romania also stands for more efficient multilateralism, alongside like-minded partners across the globe, in the fight for freedom and democracy. From day one of the war. Romania has acted in full solidarity with the brave Ukrainian people. We will continue to provide safe haven and to protect refugees coming from our neighbour, as we have done for the more than 6 million Ukrainians who have already crossed our borders. We fully support the Ukrainian peace formula as the most suitable framework conducive to a fair, lasting and sustainable peace. We also support the pursuit of international law and accountability, so that all those responsible for atrocities are brought to justice.
Our region, the wider Black Sea area, must be protected against the effects of Russia’s war against Ukraine and its hybrid war and malign interference. Romania has consistently argued that it is necessary to keep the so-called protracted or frozen conflicts in the region high on our agenda. Romania has also been at the forefront of supporting, in a multidimensional manner, the vulnerable partners in the region. We have therefore offered substantial support to our neighbour the Republic of Moldova, the country most affected by the war — after, of course. Ukraine itself.
While we work in the present to defend our values, we should also continue to project a sustainable future. We therefore continue to actively pursue the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Food insecurity and energy and economic instability affect the entire world, especially the most vulnerable in the global South. By terminating the Black Sea Grain Initiative and attacking Ukrainian ports. Russia is further exacerbating the global food crisis. We once again urge the Russian Federation to cease blocking the Initiative.
As a direct neighbour to Ukraine and a responsible and solidary international actor. Romania has played an active role in global food security efforts. Since the beginning of the war, we have facilitated the delivery of more than 25 million tons of Ukrainian grain. Romania will not let down our most vulnerable partners who need our support, especially those from the least developed countries, including from Africa. We are also investing in, and making a contribution to. African institutional resilience, peacekeeping and capacity-building.
Through our sustainable development strategy, we are advancing efficient, transparent and citizen-centred governance. Our second voluntary national review, which was issued this July, is proof that we are on the right track, as we have already achieved 62 per cent of our national targets for 2030. However, as we are keenly aware that we are lagging behind globally, we place our trust in the upcoming Sustainable Development Goals Summit and the Summit of the Future. We are also aware of the importance of financing for development. Romania is committed to increasing its official development assistance to 0.33 per cent of its gross national product by 2030. Moreover, we will contribute to the European Union’s objective of allocating 0.20 per cent of its collective official development aid to least developed countries.
The devastating effects of climate change, pollution, biodiversity loss, energy insecurity and disinformation are our global concerns. Romania’s efforts to combat those challenges are visible. For instance, we are committed to the swift ratification and implementation of the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction. We were also part of the core group promoting the General Assembly’s request for an advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the obligations of States in respect of climate change. We remain vocal in supporting climate education — a priority for Romania and for me personally. I also strongly believe that the climate-security nexus should be featured more prominently on the United Nations agenda, including at the Security Council. We hope that the Climate Ambition Summit and the twenty-eighth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change will mobilize the political will to keep the 1.5°C target alive. We must accelerate a just energy transition and emissions reduction, while also ensuring energy security.
Countering natural disaster risks also requires joint efforts, and the Emergency Platform initiative is a step in the right direction. Romania actively participates in international assistance missions, shares best practices and offers training on response measures. In our endeavours, we should use the opportunities created by digitalization, innovation and new technologies, as well as strategic investments in renewables, as enablers of sustainable development. At the same time. Romania welcomes the Secretary-General’s initiative to issue a code of conduct on information integrity on digital platforms.
In the current geopolitical context, the key to efficient multilateralism is ensuring its successful reform, which cannot be delayed any longer. An enlarged Security Council could include important additional voices from the Group of African States, from various small island developing States and even from the smallest regional group — the Group of Eastern European States.
As we celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Romania strongly advocates for the strengthening of the United Nations human rights system, including for its adequate funding. As a member of the Human Rights 
Council, we remain an active supporter of democracy, the rule of law, non-discrimination, the freedom of expression and children’s and women’s rights. At the same time, full respect for, and the promotion of, international law remain at the very core of our foreign policy. As an example. Romania is advocating for an enlarged acceptance by States of the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice, and we count on members’ support for our solid candidature for the world Court.
Next year’s Summit of the Future represents an excellent opportunity to find joint global solutions. The pact for the future must provide the United Nations with the tools to deliver, for us and for future generations. We must stand for our people and for the future we want.