At the outset. I would like to congratulate His Excellency Mr. Dennis Francis on his election to preside over the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session and to wish him every success in his work. I would also like to thank His Excellency Mr. Csaba Korosi for his outstanding efforts as President of the preceding session. And I want to take this opportunity to commend the efforts of the Secretary-General to enhance the competencies of United Nations entities with a view to realizing the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia stresses the need for States to uphold the Charter, the principles of international legitimacy and our aspirations for a better future for humankind on a basis of mutual respect for the sovereignty, independence and values of States, non-interference in their internal affairs, the peaceful settlement of disputes and refraining from the use or threat of use of force. The Kingdom’s Vision 2030 is aimed at strengthening development efforts, meeting the aspirations of our future generations, contributing to the empowerment of women and young people, building capacities for creativity and innovation and consolidating the values of openness, dialogue, tolerance and coexistence.
Saudi Arabia considers human rights issues enormously important, and our legal system includes explicit provisions that promote and protect human rights. Through a development-driven approach, we are working to foster a comprehensive and sustainable renaissance for our country that is centred on and aimed at the human beings who will guide development in the present and create development in the future with knowledge. The Kingdom has enacted numerous laws and amendments to rules and regulations in that regard and has provided capabilities that enhance the dignity of our citizens and residents by doing everything possible to preserve their lives, guarantee decent livelihoods and grant them social protection and care.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia stresses that security in the Middle East is in need of a just and comprehensive solution to the question of Palestine as soon as possible, one that is based on internationally recognized resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative and thereby guarantees the Palestinian people’s right to establish their own independent State within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. As always, we reject and condemn all unilateral steps taken in flagrant violation of international law, as they undermine regional and international efforts to achieve peace and obstruct the path to a political solution. 
The Kingdom is committed to supporting all efforts aimed at promoting security and stability, with a focus on comprehensive development, making room for peaceful dialogue and alleviating tensions. We urge the States in our region to avoid escalation and instead to focus on mutual interests and benefits, with a view to realizing the hopes and aspirations of the peoples of the region. In our efforts to build a better future for the region and the world, we have worked to reinforce the principle of collective action by hosting several regional joint summits under the framework of the Gulf Cooperation Council and the League of Arab States, with the participation of all States, including the Syrian Arab Republic, out of a belief that resolving the crisis in Syria will contribute to regional and global stability. As part of those efforts to achieve regional stability, the Kingdom held rounds of talks with the Islamic Republic of Iran, hosted by Baghdad and Muscat. That led to the conclusion of the Beijing Agreement, which inaugurated a resumption of diplomatic representation and direct communication between the two countries, based on mutual respect for the sovereignty, independence and security of States, non-interference in their internal affairs and respect for the Charter of the United Nations and that of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is committed to the security and stability of its sister country of Yemen. We support all efforts aimed at resolving the crisis there, alleviating the human suffering of our brother people of Yemen, reaching a political solution that restores security and stability in the country and reduces potential threats to the Kingdom and the region. We want to emphasize our initiative aimed at ending the war in Yemen and reaching a comprehensive political solution, and we support United Nations and international efforts to reach a political settlement, in accordance with the three terms of reference, including Security Council resolution 2216 (2015).
With regard to Lebanon, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia continues to stand with its brother Lebanese people and calls on all the parties involved to carry out comprehensive, structural political and economic reforms that will enable Lebanon to overcome its current crisis. We also stress that the State should work to extend its authority over the entire Lebanese territories, in accordance with the relevant Security Council resolutions and the Taif Accords, with a view to re-establishing security and combating drug smuggling operations and terrorist activities that endanger regional and international security.
With regard to the situation in Iraq, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia considers the security and stability of Iraq to be crucial to security and stability in the region generally. The Kingdom reiterates its support for the security, development, territorial integrity. Arab identity and social fabric of Iraq.
Turning to the situation in the Sudan, we are alarmed by the escalation and military clashes in the country between the Sudanese armed forces and the Rapid Support Forces, and we support all efforts to de-escalate the situation and prevent the crisis from deteriorating further. We have taken the initiative to host talks between the parties to the conflict and we are working with the United States of America to protect civilians and deliver assistance to the people affected. We have been working on humanitarian efforts since the crisis began, including by carrying out a rescue operation at sea that saved thousands of Saudi Arabian citizens, nationals of fraternal and friendly countries and staff of the United Nations and other international organizations who had been stranded in the Sudan.
His Majesty King Salmanbin Abdulaziz Al-Saudhas launched a popular fundraising campaign for our brother people of the Sudan and has allocated $100 million in relief and humanitarian assistance to address the crisis through the King Salman Humanitarian Aid and Relief Centre, in addition to facilitating sea and air bridges to deliver food, health-care and relief supplies and other essential needs. As part of those efforts, along with our international partners we hosted a high-level donor conference for the Sudan in June at which donors pledged to address the humanitarian crisis, mobilize international humanitarian support and provide more than $1.5 billion in assistance. The Kingdom is eagerly anticipating seeing those efforts succeed and hoping for the Sudan to reach safe harbour and emerge from the crisis.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia stresses that it is vital to achieve security and stability in Libya, safeguard the country’s sovereignty, independence and territorial unity and put an end to interference in its internal affairs. We support a full ceasefire in Libya and Libya’s call for a full and immediate withdrawal of all foreign forces, fighters and mercenaries from the country in accordance with Security Council resolution 2570 (2021). 
We also reaffirm the importance of security and stability in Afghanistan, which must not be a safe haven for terrorist organizations. We call for respect for the fundamental rights of the Afghan people, including the right of Afghan women to education and employment, and for regional and international efforts to be stepped up in order to provide humanitarian and economic assistance to alleviate the suffering of our brother people of Afghanistan.
With regard to the situation of Russia and Ukraine, the Kingdom reiterates its call for putting an end to the crisis and reducing its negative impact on global security and stability. We should spare no effort in working to end the crisis and find a peaceful solution, while respecting the principles of international law so as to safeguard the security and interests of all. As an extension of our humanitarian efforts. His Royal Highness the Crown Prince and Prime Minister has taken initiatives aimed at resolving the crisis and has continued to work with the States concerned in support of international efforts to establish peace, while using his good offices to facilitate the release of prisoners of various nationalities. In addition. Ukraine was invited to attend the thirty-second session of the League of Arab States Summit held in Jeddah. In August, the Kingdom hosted a meeting of national security advisers on the crisis in Ukraine, bringing together representatives from more than 40 States and international organizations. We emphasize our willingness to continue mediation efforts between the two parties.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia stresses the importance of efforts aimed at the ultimate elimination of nuclear weapons. It is incumbent on the entire international community to honour its commitments to the existing treaties and legal frameworks in order to achieve a world free of nuclear weapons, especially in the Middle East. We reaffirm the importance of maintaining international peace and security and remain ready to deploy our good offices to resolve international and regional conflicts in accordance with the relevant international principles and norms. In that regard, my country stresses that the only way to establish security and stability in any region of the world is through cooperation and coordination among States aimed at realizing development and progress, and by avoiding races to acquire weapons whose destructiveness is a threat to humankind.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia remains committed to achieving the purposes and principles of the United Nations for maintaining international peace and security. We reiterate our call for reforming the Security Council so that it can play a fairer and more representative role in our world today, and so that we can make it more effective in keeping up with the constant changes and developments in the international community and more efficient in addressing our common challenges.
Our international community has made great strides in the fight against terrorism and extremism. We must continue to work tirelessly to counter and eliminate that scourge, which is not linked to any race, religion or belief. The world must show steadfastness and determination in the face of those who support or sponsor terrorism and extremism. We must reject all forms of aggression against sacred values, including the propagation of hatred and Islamophobia under any pretext, as well as recurring incidents such as burnings of the Qur’an. Such grave acts jeopardize mutual respect and harmony among peoples and hinder international efforts to spread the values of tolerance and moderation as well as the rejection of extremism.
We advocate an approach aimed at consolidating a culture of peace worldwide. My country welcomed the resolution adopted at the eighteenth extraordinary session of the Council of Foreign Ministers of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation on repeated incidents of desecration and burning of the Holy Qur’an. We also commend the Human Rights Council’s adoption of its resolution 53/1, entitled “Countering religious hatred constituting incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence”. We call for the promotion of dialogue, understanding and cooperation among cultures and civilizations with a view to realizing peace and harmony in the world while complying with relevant international human rights instruments and laws.
The stability of global energy markets is a cornerstone of global economic growth. Saudi Arabia is firmly committed to preserving the stability, reliability, sustainability and security of global crude-oil markets, as well as to meeting the needs of consumers to ensure a healthy and beneficial economy for producers and consumers worldwide. We continue to emphasize the importance of collective cooperation with the Organization of Petroleum-Exporting Countries Plus (OPEC+) in order to promote the stability, reliability, sustainability and security of global crude-oil markets. The policies adopted by OPEC+ have made it possible to closely monitor the markets through a preventive approach, thereby contributing to their stability and 
balance, which was clearly illustrated by the stability shown by the oil markets in 2022 compared to other energy markets such as natural gas and coal.
Conscious of the importance of addressing the challenges posed by climate change. Saudi Arabia has a major interest in reducing emissions and developing adaptation measures. In that regard, we support the calls for a gradual and responsible transition to low-emission clean-energy systems, using all available energy sources to ensure sustainability. We must continue international cooperation and concerted efforts to reach those goals, taking into account variations in national and regional circumstances, along with the inclusive socioeconomic goals of sustainable development.
Given the scale of that challenge. Saudi Arabia seeks to establish its global leadership role in the field of sustainability. We have launched the Saudi Green Initiative and the Middle East Green Initiative aimed at leading the global efforts to protect our environment, reduce greenhouse-gas emissions and promote public health and quality of life. We are working to increase the use of renewable energy and to reduce or even eliminate emissions and achieve sustainable development. The Kingdom has announced that it will double its contribution to reducing emissions compared to 2015 — to the tune of 278 million tons per year by 2030 — in order to achieve carbon neutrality, as per the circular carbon economy approach. We are also working to promote international efforts to ensure water resources worldwide. The Prime Minister recently announced a proposal for establishing a global water organization with a view to developing and integrating the efforts of States and organizations to ensure sustainable water resources accessible to all, and thereby helping to address water challenges in a comprehensive manner.
Based on our ambitious vision for the future. Saudi Arabia has applied to host World Expo 2030 under the theme “The era of change: Together for a fore sighted tomorrow”. We intend to apply the Expo’s theme to the future of the planet, basing our efforts on cutting- edge technologies while focusing on the Sustainable Development Goals. The Expo will be an opportunity for promoting projects with universal impact and for cooperation aimed at finding global solutions through innovation, sustainability and inclusiveness. All of those factors will be at the core of the World Expo 2030 in Riyadh and will demonstrate to the world the Kingdom’s firm and continued commitment to developing countries. We would like to express our thanks and appreciation to the States that have supported our candidacy and ask all others to support us in hosting World Expo 2030.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia would like to convey to the world its message, values and principles in a spirit of partnership and respect, with the aim of laying the foundations of a better future for all humankind.
