I would like to express my heartfelt condolences to the people of the Kingdom of Morocco and the Republic of Libya who lost their loved ones in the recent natural calamities. South Sudan stands in solidarity with them during this difficult moment in their respective countries.
On behalf of the people and the Government of the Republic of South Sudan. I stand here today to reaffirm our commitment to world peace and security. We are committed to global efforts aimed at addressing the challenges that we face as a human family. We are also committed to multilateralism and international cooperation as the best means of achieving our shared aspirations. Within that context, we are hopeful that, together, we can rebuild trust among Member States and reignite global solidarity on the basis of the sovereign equality of all States, as enshrined in the founding Charter of the United Nations.
We recognize the urgency of the challenges before us. We are also aware of the concerted action required to address those challenges in order to ensure a better future for the coming generation. To that effect. South Sudan has developed a Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) rescue plan, with a focus on seven SDG targets. The plan provides a road map for a better future for our people.
Given that education is the key that will allow us to achieve other SDGs rapidly. I am pleased to report that South Sudan has made some progress in its education sector since gaining our independence in 2011. Our Constitution, for example, guarantees all children free access to education. We have also designated education as a human right of every child. In February. I directed the Ministry of Education to implement a free primary and secondary education policy across the country. The policy has directly led to the enrolment of 2.3 million children in our schools. To ensure that girls stay in schools, we have banned child marriages through an act of Parliament. More important, we have increased the education budget with the goal of paying teachers a living wage.
In the health sector, we plan to dedicate resources towards providing affordable and standard heath care. That will be done through a primary health care approach that is inclusive and cost effective. 
On climate change. South Sudan is dedicated to addressing its adverse impact. We plan to prioritize sustainable land use, promote renewable energy and collaborate with international partners to reduce carbon emissions and protect our environment for generations to come. While working on that, it is only fair for us to call upon developed countries to cut their emissions by 45 per cent and honour their pledges to make funds available for mitigation, adaptation and loss and damage to the developing countries. With the recently concluded Africa Climate Summit, held in Nairobi, it is high time that the declaration adopted at the Summit form the new basis for rebuilding trust and regaining global solidarity for attaining the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
We acknowledge the political, humanitarian and security challenges we have faced as a country since 2013. However, we turned the corner with the signing of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan in 2018. Now we are determined to build on the commitments of our Revised National Development Strategy (2021- 2024) to consolidate peace and stabilize the economy. The ongoing public financial management reforms and the recently concluded National Economic Conference form a solid basis for sound management of public resources for the benefit of our citizens.
What remains now is to fast-track the implementation of the remaining provisions of the agreement in order to conclude the transitional period peacefully through fair, transparent and credible elections in 2024. We have also engaged in dialogue and consultation with various stakeholders, including civil society, women, youth, traditional leaders and opposition groups to ensure that our peace process is owned and driven by our people. As we move in that direction, we call upon the United Nations to lift the arm embargo imposed on us to aid peace implementation and secure the elections. The arms embargo has impeded the implementation of security arrangements because the effective deployment of the unified forces we have graduated cannot happen without arms.
As a country sharing a border with the Republic of Sudan. South Sudan has received thousands of Sudanese refugees and returnees since the conflict broke out in the Sudan in April. The influx has overwhelmed our border communities and created a humanitarian crisis. I am appealing to the international community to make resources available to help refugees and displaced persons who have crossed into South Sudan. While the world is dealing with multiple crises, we call for the provision of sustained support to those displaced persons as we work on how to restore peace and stability in the Sudan.
In conclusion. South Sudan stands before the Assembly as a resolute partner in the collective pursuits of a better future for all. I extent our hand of friendship to fellow Member States, international organizations and civil society.