In an international context marked by growing divisions, increased tensions and a decline in trust, it is with a great sense of responsibility that, as Prime Minister and Head of Government. I take the floor in this great Assembly, representing the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe.
I would like to respectfully pay tribute to the victims of the recent earthquake in Morocco and the floods in Libya.
Let me take the opportunity of this general debate of the seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly to congratulate Ambassador Dennis Francis on his election and to express to him our full support throughout his term of office. We also thank the outgoing President. Mr. Csaba Korosi, for his commitment in conducting the work of the previous session, particularly given the complexity brought about by new conflicts and the global food crisis.
The theme chosen for this year’s World Population Day. “Unleashing the power of gender equality”, which we applaud, is highly relevant at a time when humankind is going through the greatest of threats, reversing progress in human development and widening inequalities in our respective States.
The Protocol on the Rights of Women in Africa, known as the Maputo Protocol, is celebrating its twentieth anniversary, and we must acknowledge that there is a huge deficit in terms of empowerment and equal opportunities, particularly with regard to women’s participation in political decision-making bodies. However, we could also mention the Istanbul Convention, which, despite being binding for the signatory States, did little to translate the Council of Europe’s will into results. That issue, like others, is a global objective that requires the commitment of the international community. Governments, organizations and civil society to create a fairer and more equitable world for all.
Given the persistent and increasing challenges that remain, particularly in terms of poverty, hunger, inequalities and environmental issues, beyond our addresses, we, the leaders of the various nations represented here, must question ourselves and recognize our failures to protect our planet and ensure shared prosperity by 2030.
My country, a small island State that has enjoyed effective democracy for more than 30 years, and which is still developing, is one of the main victims of climate change, ecosystem degradation and economic dependence. My country is experiencing a situation of genuine economic and financial urgency in the short term, well known to our main partners, while, at the same time, going through a complex process of transition to the middle stage of development and pursuing a policy adapted to its reality, respecting multicultural diversity and human rights.
We have striven, with some success, to adopt the codes, recommendations and good attitudes aimed at achieving the 17 Sustainable Development Goals, but the structural problems, asymmetries of all kinds and a lack of trust in democratic institutions on the part of our populations are increasing.
We should not hesitate to point the finger at those responsible for climate disruption within the Group of 20, or at the bodies of global economic governance that continue to ignore our social and environmental objectives, in particular by denying us access to financial resources in reasonable quantities and conditions.
Even more worrisome is the fact that we are witnessing an increasing polarization and fragmentation of the world and global governance, with its growing proportion of populism and nationalism. The very digital technological society, which could have been the catalyst for the development of our countries and global citizenship, is becoming a new source of inequality, wealth concentration and domination. Inequality, a lack of respect and a lack of inclusion can lead only to ever- greater fractures and setbacks.
Coups d’etat and attempts to subvert the constitutional order are becoming increasingly frequent, while long-standing conflicts, such as those in Palestine and Cuba, persist. Those in Yemen. Syria, the Sudan and Libya are following the same path. Armed conflicts in violation of international law, regardless of their nature, also receive differential treatment. Our condemnation of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine was clear and without hesitation because we respect international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
Unfortunately, refugees and the dead are not equal in rights and dignity in a world that claims to be civilized. It seems that today only global pandemics are capable of uniting and mobilizing us. We are slow to act in order to impose peace in response to the latent conflict in the Great Lakes region, while the list of dead, displaced people and destruction of all kinds continues to grow, and international peace missions show their limits owing to the lack of clear and effective commitments to those who are the primary victims.
It may be too late, but indifference and hypocrisy are unacceptable. Our problems as poor countries tend to also become the problems of rich countries — demographic disparity, economic disparity, climate deregulation and the loss of institutional trust, among other things. However, there is still hope of finding new impetus if we resolutely commit to reforming our institutions, starting with the United Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions, towards a renewed and more supportive multilateralism.
As leaders, it is our duty to cultivate an art capable of articulating the expected solutions that can enlighten so many human beings whose experience is nothing more than a journey of suffering and uncertainty. True leadership means finding the necessary compromises. It means having the ability to make peace and promote progress.
As the saying goes, nature abhors a vacuum, and our rhetoric, our appeals at summit after summit, ring hollow. We are convinced that peaceful, equitable and sustainable societies, with educated and trained young people in good health, are in the common interest, and that we must therefore use common sense to prevent major and unpredictable disruptions. We still have the technical, financial and human resources to reform the international political system. The rich countries have a responsibility, but ours cannot be excluded either.
I reaffirm the firm commitment of the Democratic Republic of Republic of Sao Tome and Principe to actively collaborating with its regional and international partners in all initiatives aimed at eradicating all acts that are inhumane, harmful to human beings and the environment and detrimental to humanist values and freedom.
We firmly believe that our Organization is the converging centre of our causes and is the only entity whose role is to structure and systematize our common challenges and lead the harmonization of our world, while respecting cultural differences, models and systems of government and economic choices.
Before concluding. I would like to say how especially grateful my country is to our Secretary- General. Mr. Antonio Guterres, for his tireless efforts to strengthen the role of the United Nations in promoting peace, democracy and the protection of human life worldwide, as well as in the fight against poverty and climate change in all their forms. His determination challenges and compels us.
