In today’s challenging and turbulent times, the international community needs integration and trust more than ever. We are now witnessing alarming developments in the international arena, against the backdrop of increasing modern threats and challenges. Terrorism, extremism, transnational organized crime, rapid armament and the escalation of the Cold War imperil international peace, security and development. At the same time, the disastrous impacts of climate change — extreme heat, floods, droughts, fires and other natural disasters, in addition to water shortages and famine — pose a serious threat to humanity. In that context, joint concerted efforts to address these threats and challenges and to achieve the goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development have become more imperative. To that end, we welcome the theme of the seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly. “Rebuilding trust and reigniting global solidarity: Accelerating action on the 2030 Agenda and its Sustainable Development Goals towards peace, prosperity, progress and sustainability for all.”
Despite the international community’s efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda, the world is not on track to meet most of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Unfortunately, developing countries, least developed countries and small island developing States are bearing the brunt of that. While Tajikistan has made significant progress on some of the SDGs, in particular Goals 1. 7. 12 and 13, the country still faces challenges in fulfilling its pledge to achieve the SDGs by 2030. Therefore, we understand that solidarity, financing, the implementation of commitments and other practical measures should be strengthened, and doing so requires a truly fundamental shift. 
Tajikistan therefore supported the Secretary- General’s proposal made by the Secretary-General in his report. Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), to reverse the course and turbocharge the SDGs. We also welcome the Secretary-General’s SDG Stimulus to Deliver Agenda 2030 and call for at least $500 billion to be made available to developing countries, least developed countries and small island developing States annually in order to accelerate progress on the 2030 Agenda. We also welcome the call to reform the international financial architecture in order to ensure the mobilization of stable and long-term financing and investments, among other things, to achieve the SDGs and tackle climate issues.
As we can all observe, climate change impacts are increasing across the globe. This year we witnessed the highest air temperature recorded in the period since observations began. Asia is warming faster than the global average, according to the World Meteorological Organization’s most recent State of the Global Climate report. The negative consequences of that process, such as droughts, floods, landslides and fires in different regions of the world, including Tajikistan, are very alarming phenomena. With 93 per cent of its territory covered by mountains. Tajikistan is experiencing the impact of climate change first-hand and is considered one of the countries most vulnerable to the impact of climate change.
Frequent climate-related disasters in the form of landslides, mudflows, floods and droughts in Tajikistan result in loss of human life and infrastructure on an annual basis. To that end. Tajikistan attaches particular importance to the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030, which contains calls to promote the improvement of early warning systems, to increase investments in programmes on natural disaster risk reduction and to render financial assistance to developing countries. Tajikistan is one of the pilot countries implementing the Secretary-General’s Early Warnings for All initiative.
More than 13 thousand glaciers are registered in the Republic of Tajikistan. Sixty per cent of the region’s water resources form in our country. Unfortunately, over the past decades. Tajikistan has lost more than 1.000 glaciers, with significant implications for future food security, water availability and the ecosystems of Central Asia and beyond. The intense melting of glaciers, which are the primary source of fresh water, requires the adoption of concrete measures, including research, data collection and processing and enhanced international cooperation. I express my gratitude to all Member States for their cooperation in adopting General Assembly 77/158 of 14 December 2022, which declares 2025 the International Year of Glaciers’ Preservation. I invite all interested parties to join efforts to ensure the targeted implementation of the resolution. We stand ready to work with the international community within the newly created Group of Friends of Glaciers and beyond to implement the mandates contained in the resolution. Tajikistan is convinced that that initiative will give a powerful impetus to a new global movement to take necessary collective action and to protect glaciers from intense melting.
I would also like to highlight the successful outcomes of the United Nations Conference on the Midterm Comprehensive Review of the Implementation of the Objectives of the International Decade for Action. “Water for Sustainable Development”. 2018- 2028. I believe that fulfilling the commitments made by the international community at the Conference will contribute to achieving Goal 6 and addressing other internationally agreed water-related goals. Recently, following the Conference, the General Assembly unanimously adopted another resolution, proposed by Tajikistan, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and Senegal. We hope that Member States and other partners will join our efforts in that process. It is worth noting that Dushanbe will host the third International High-level Conference on the International Decade for Action. “Water for Sustainable Development”. 2018-2028, in 2024 and the International Conference on Glaciers’ Preservation in 2025. We expect the international community to take an active part in those important international conferences. As a proactive country that champions the global water and climate agenda. Tajikistan will continue to strive to promote cooperation between countries and organizations.
In modern conditions, the formation of a green economy has become one of humankind’s urgent tasks. In our country. 98 per cent of electricity is produced from renewable sources, that is, hydropower, and Tajikistan ranks sixth in the world in that aspect. Tajikistan’s effective and rational use of its tremendous hydropower resources can provide a favourable basis for the development of green energy generation throughout the region. We consider the role of the Green Climate Fund to be positive and constructive in the process of addressing environmental challenges and adapting to climate change. In support of the Fund’s strategic plan for 2024-2027, we invite Member States, especially developed countries, and other stakeholders to contribute to financing its implementation.
Regional solidarity and integration are of paramount importance in today’s interconnected world. It enables countries to address shared challenges, promote peace and respond effectively to emergencies. Currently, as a result of joint measures taken by the countries of Central Asia, a favourable atmosphere has been created for strengthening regional integration. It was fully demonstrated during the fifth consultative meeting of the Heads of State of Central Asia, which took place on 14 and 15 September in Dushanbe. That initiative will contribute to a stable atmosphere of peace, cooperation, sustainable development and prosperity in our region.
Security, stability and regional cooperation in Central Asia are directly linked with the situation in neighbouring Afghanistan. Afghanistan continues to face a difficult political, economic and social situation. As stated by the Secretary-General. 97 per cent of Afghans live in poverty. In this challenging time. Tajikistan reaffirms its commitment to continue providing humanitarian assistance and allowing the use of its infrastructure, including six bridges on its border, to support the Afghan people. I would like to take this opportunity to once again appeal to the international community to increase the volume of humanitarian aid to the suffering people of Afghanistan. In that regard, we are ready for further increased cooperation with international partners and other interested parties.
We continue to consider the establishment of intra-Afghan dialogue and the creation of a truly inclusive Government, with the participation of representatives of all peoples, nations and political and social groups, as an important basis for achieving lasting peace and genuine stability in Afghanistan. Drug trafficking, especially from Afghanistan, has increased dramatically over the past two years. During that period, the competent authorities of Tajikistan seized more than 10 tons of narcotics on the border with that country, which is several times more than in previous years.
The Government of Tajikistan is continuously taking practical measures within the framework of its national strategy for combating terrorism and extremism for 2021-2025. In cooperation with the international community, we intend to hold the next international conference on counter-terrorism and its financing in Dushanbe in 2024. Tajikistan reiterates that the response to the growing threats of terrorism, extremism, trafficking in narcotics and other global modern threats and challenges must be comprehensive and uncompromising. In that connection, we believe that the Office of Counter-Terrorism can and should contribute effectively to the integrated and balanced implementation of the United Nations Global Counter- Terrorism Strategy and other relevant documents to address all aspects of that threat and challenge. The efforts should also be focused on preventing the use of the Internet for radicalization, recruitment and propaganda in service of extremism and violence. Tajikistan welcomes the adoption in June of the eighth review of the United Nations Global Counter-terrorism Strategy. We believe it provides a robust framework in further guiding our counter-terrorism efforts.
The fabric of our societies is woven with the threads of different cultures, traditions and faiths. That solidarity is a good basis for peaceful life in a space of mutual understanding between different cultures and religions. In that regard, manifestations of discrimination or racial and religious hostility, with an understanding of their negative consequences, are absolutely unacceptable. Those actions, as well the politicization of religious issues, undermine the very essence of our international community. Insulting religious sentiments or perpetrating hatred or violence against any religion or belief has tragic consequences. In most cases, such provocative actions trigger intolerance and mistrust, causing divisions and conflicts among civilizations. In that sense. Tajikistan strongly condemns any insult to the religious sanctity of peoples, including the Holy Qur’an and other cultural and religious values of humankind.
As a co-sponsor of the resolution entitled “Promoting inter-religious and intercultural dialogue and tolerance in countering hate speech” (resolution 77/318), recently adopted by the Assembly. Tajikistan reiterates the importance of promoting dialogue and mutual understanding among civilizations for peace and harmony in the world. We believe that spreading the values of tolerance and peace is the best way to confront hate speech, fanaticism, extremism, violence and incitement. Let us stand united against actions that seek to divide us and instead work towards a world in which mutual respect and recognition are the cornerstones of our global society. 
As a nation that has demonstrated resilience, stability and commitment to peace. Tajikistan seeks to secure a non-permanent seat on the Security Council for 2028-2029. I take this opportunity to call on the Member States to render their valuable support for Tajikistan’s candidacy during the 2027 elections.
In conclusion. I would like to once again emphasize that achieving all our agreed goals will be possible only based on mutual understanding, coordination, integration and tolerance. To that end, allow me to recite a poem from the famous Tajik-Persian poet, writer and thinker Saadi Shirazi that is very relevant, speaks to the theme of the seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly and corresponds to our shared commitments: “Human beings are members of a whole; In the creation of one essence and soul. If one member is afflicted with pain; Other members uneasy will remain”.
