On behalf of myself and the Turkish nation. I would like to salute the members of the General Assembly with my most heartfelt regards. I would like to congratulate Mr. Korosi, who successfully completed his term as President of the General Assembly at its seventy seventh session, and to wish Mr. Francis, who is succeeding him, every success.
I hope that the seventy-eighth session of the General Assembly, convened in a spirit of trust and solidarity, will be a blessing for the entire human race. Unfortunately, it is not possible to draw a more optimistic picture of the future of our world than the assessments made from this rostrum last year (see A/77/ PV.4). The picture before us shows that we are facing increasingly complex and dangerous challenges on a global scale. There are conflicts, wars, humanitarian crises, political strife and social tensions to the south, north, east and west of my country. Those growing challenges, compounded by global economic problems, are becoming more and more difficult to deal with. In addition to the humanitarian tragedy, the war on Europe’s eastern borders has created serious problems in all areas, from economy to security and from energy to food supply security. Terrorism, which is used as an instrument of proxy wars in Syria. North Africa and the Sahel region, is causing irreparable damage to the increasingly fragile international security climate. The areas of operation of terrorist organizations, which grow by exploiting the ambitions of global Powers, are spreading like an epidemic across vast geographic areas, taking advantage of technological developments and deteriorating socioeconomic conditions everywhere. The signs of xenophobia, racism and Islamophobia turning into a new crisis have reached alarming levels in the past year. No matter which corner of the world we live in, climate change and related natural disasters have become a reality of our daily lives.
On the morning of 6 February. Türkiye faced, in the words of the Secretary-General, “one of the biggest natural disasters in our times”, both in terms of its magnitude and the area it affected. It is impossible for us to forget the sincerity of the international community, including that of the United Nations, in responding urgently to our appeal for help. We will not forget the self-sacrificing efforts and the generous support provided to our country. The friendship shown to our country on that very dark day — on which more than 50.000 people lost their lives. 850.000 buildings were destroyed and cities sheltering millions of people were virtually levelled to the ground — was an important source of consolation for us. We have friends from all across the globe from 100 countries. I would like to thank them for the helping hand they so generously extended to us. We have spared no effort in reconstructing our destroyed cities and their buildings.
A few days ago. Libya, with which we have strong historical ties, was subjected to heavy destruction and significant loss of life caused by storms and floods. Following the disaster. Türkiye immediately mobilized its resources on behalf of Libya, where 12.000 people lost their lives and thousands are still unaccounted for. In the first phase, we sent three vessels and three aircraft, along with 567 relief personnel, hundreds of vehicles and thousands of tons of food, shelter and sanitary supplies. Our non-governmental organizations are also participating in the relief efforts in that region, with their own resources and capabilities. As a country that stands in solidarity with victimized and oppressed people, wherever they may be in the world, we have not and will not abandon our Libyan brothers and sisters. Hopefully, friendly countries will mobilize to extend a helping hand to Libya
I would also like to wish a rapid recovery to our Moroccan brothers and sisters, who were hit by a very strong earthquake, just like the one we recently experienced.
We are pleased to see that this year’s theme of the General Assembly is in line with Türkiye’s goals. The Century of Türkiye, which we started to realize during the 100th anniversary of our republic, is the most concrete expression of that overlapping vision and is one that eliminates global injustices, addresses economic inequalities and promotes peace, security, stability and prosperity in an effective and inclusive way that embraces humanity. In short, it is our call for the establishment of an international system for the benefit of all humankind. This vision is finding ever greater resonance.
We agree with Secretary-General Guterres’ recent observation that the institutions established after the Second World War no longer reflect the world of today. That statement expresses our call that “the world is bigger than five”. The Security Council has ceased to be the guarantor of world security and has become a battleground for the political strategies of only five countries. We consider the recent events in Cyprus to be a manifestation of the hollowed-out nature of that institutional structure that no longer inspires justice or trust.
As a country that has pioneered numerous initiatives to strengthen peace and stability, we attach great importance to Mr. Guterres’ call for a new agenda for peace. With that understanding, since the beginning of the Russian-Ukrainian war, we have been endeavouring to keep both our Russian and our Ukrainian friends around the table, with the thesis that war will have no winners and peace will have no losers. We will step up our efforts to end the war through diplomacy and dialogue on the basis of Ukraine’s independence and territorial integrity.
With the Black Sea Grain Initiative, which we launched together with the United Nations, we prevented the threat of a global hunger crisis by ensuring the delivery of 33 million tons of grain through the Black Sea to global markets. However, the failure to implement that agreement in all its elements has left the world facing a new crisis. That initiative had been extended three times, partly through my efforts. This humanitarian bridge, which extends to countries in dire need, will, we hope, benefit from our arrangements and negotiations. We have a new plan, whereby another 1 million tons of grain will be released to countries in dire need around the world. Our aim is to make the greatest possible contribution to world peace and prosperity in the face of the conflicts around us.
The humanitarian tragedy in Syria is now marking its thirteenth year, and it is worsening the living conditions of everyone in the region, regardless of their origin or faith. We are the only country to take a principled, constructive and fair stance against developments that threaten Syria’s political unity, social integrity and economic well-being. It is becoming increasingly important to end the crisis in the south with a comprehensive, lasting and sustainable solution that meets the legitimate expectations of the people. The devastating impact of the 6 February earthquakes, which affected 14 million people in our country, was also deeply felt in Syria, especially in north-western Syria. The already troubled humanitarian situation has only worsened. It is unfortunate that United Nations cross-border humanitarian aid operations in the region were interrupted at such a time.
As Türkiye, we will not abandon the more than 4 million people struggling to survive in the north of Syria to their fate and demise. Upon completion of the construction, led by us, of the settlements beyond our borders, we will continue to encourage the return of the refugees in our country to those settlements. However, the biggest threat to Syria’s territorial integrity and political unity is the support given to terrorist organizations, guided by the Powers that have designs on that country. The Syrian people are overwhelmed by the Kurdistan Workers’ Party and Partiya Yekitiya Demokrat terrorist organizations and the radical groups organized on the basis of sectarian divisions. Moreover, different groups have reached the point that it is no longer bearable for the people. As a matter of fact, the various consequences of that have begun to emerge recently. Iraq, another neighbour, is also making sincere efforts to overcome the internal and external challenges it faces. We act with an understanding that strengthens Iraq’s political unity, territorial integrity and reconstruction efforts, and we do not discriminate between the constituent elements of the country.
For countries in the region, the path to development will be established so that regional integration will be ensured. The games of those who cling to the Da’esh excuse every time they are in trouble in the region have now been all but exposed. As the leader of a country that has actually fought the greatest battle against Da’esh, inflicted the greatest losses on that organization and knows the realities before and behind the problem. I want to speak very clearly and frankly. We are sick and tired of the hypocrisy of those who use Da’esh and similar organizations as a front for their own political and economic interests in the Middle East. North Africa and the Sahel, but especially in Syria and Iraq. We are tired. The threat in those regions is not confined to Da’esh. The real threat is the terrorist organizations, paramilitary groups, mercenaries and local elements that are used and that are being nurtured as tools in proxy wars, and whoever pays the highest price will use those elements.
In spite of that reality, countries that continue to work with terrorist organizations in the service of their own political and economic interests have no right to complain about terrorism and its consequences. In such a world, no one is safe, whether they live right next to a conflict zone or far away, on land surrounded by oceans — nobody can be safe. That is why we say that, under the auspices of the United Nations, we must rapidly restructure the institutions charged with ensuring the security, peace and prosperity of the world. We must build a global governance architecture that is capable of representing all origins, beliefs and cultures in the world with its geography and demography. In conclusion, we say once again with all of our heart, the world is bigger than five, and a fairer world is possible. 
I would now like to briefly share with the Assembly my country’s approach to various problem areas, starting with our own region. The transformation of the eastern Mediterranean into a sovereign region of peace, prosperity and stability will be possible only if the rights and laws of all parties are respected. We have no eyes on anybody’s rights, and we do not, and will not, let anyone to ignore our rights. This is the sixtieth anniversary of the emergence of the Cyprus question. The Turkish Cypriot side has always made sincere efforts to find a just, lasting and sustainable solution to the Cyprus issue. It is widely accepted that this solution can no longer be realized on the basis of the federation model. We therefore call on the international community to recognize the independence of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus and establish diplomatic, political and economic ties with the country. We also expect the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus to strictly uphold its obligation of impartiality. We would not want the already-discredited Force to face further loss of its credibility in Cyprus.
We are making sincere efforts vis-a-vis Yemen. We have strong historical ties with Yemen, and we hope and pray that the issue will be settled once and for all by ensuring unconditional respect for the territorial integrity and unity of that country. Our relations with Egypt were stagnant for a while, but we have recently embarked on a new era, in which relations are developing quite rapidly on the basis of mutual interests and benefits. It is also very important to mention that, in order for peace to prevail in the Middle East, the Palestinian-Israeli conflict should be eventually resolved. We will continue to support the Palestinian people and State, as they struggle to achieve their legitimate rights under international law. It bears repeating that, without the realization of an independent and geographically integrated Palestinian State, based on the 1967 borders, it will be difficult for Israel to achieve the peace and security that it seeks in that part of the world. In that context, we will continue to pursue ensuring respect for the historic status of Jerusalem.
We have enjoyed strong political, economic and humanitarian ties with the Balkans throughout history, and we are working hard on bilateral, regional and international platforms to ensure stability in that critical region of Europe and resolve disagreements through dialogue. We actively support the process for the normalization of relations between Kosovo and Serbia, which have been strained recently. The increasingly complex nature of regional and global challenges underlines more than ever the need for relations between Türkiye and the European Union to move forward on a healthy basis. We expect the European Union to quickly begin fulfilling its long-neglected obligations towards our country. In particular, ambivalent attitudes against Türkiye should stop once and for all.
Latin America and the Caribbean is another region where we are mobilizing all elements of our humanitarian foreign policy and where our ties of friendship are getting stronger by the day. In the near future, we intend to transform those relations into a Türkiye-Latin America and the Caribbean partnership policy. As we commemorate the sixtieth anniversary of its establishment, the African Union is a monumental symbol for the continent, taking its destiny in its own hands and standing up. The process that started with the will to find African solutions to African problems has turned into one of the most important development projects in the world. To support Africa on that path, we have crowned our ties of friendship with the continent with a strategic partnership. I must once again reiterate, however, that we have welcomed the African Union’s membership in the Group of 20, to which we have attached great importance too. It is a fact that the Sahel faces serious political, economic, social and security challenges. We hope that the Niger, which has recently experienced turbulent times, will restore constitutional order and democratic governance as soon as possible. Any military intervention in the Niger risks plunging that country and the entire region into deeper instability.
Our Asia Anew Initiative has become a symbol of our will to further advance our relations with Asia, our ancestral homeland, on the basis of mutual benefit and shared priorities. We have a historic opportunity to build peace, tranquillity and cooperation in the South Caucasus. In order to fully take advantage of that opportunity, we have launched a process with Armenia, aimed at good-neighbourly relations and full normalization. In the same spirit, we have supported the negotiations between Azerbaijan and Armenia from the very beginning. However. Armenia is not taking full advantage of this historic opportunity. We are eager to see a comprehensive peace agreement signed between the two countries, as soon as possible, and promises to be quickly fulfilled, especially the opening of the Zangezur corridor. Karabakh is the territory of Azerbaijan. Any other status imposed will 
never be accepted. Everybody has the right to coexist on Azerbaijani soil, including the Armenians, which should be our primary goal. We are moving together with Azerbaijan under the motto that we are two nations and one State. Efforts to strengthen our cooperation with the countries of Central Asia, with whom we share the same culture and where the roots of our ancient civilization lie, are under way. We are pleased that the Organization of Turkic States is becoming an increasingly effective regional and global actor.
The people of Afghanistan, who have undergone difficult times for half a century, are in dire need of humanitarian assistance and support, regardless of political motives. The transformation of the interim Government into an inclusive Administration in which all segments of society are fairly represented will pave the way forward for Afghanistan and will be positively welcomed in the international arena. Another development that will pave the way for regional peace, stability and prosperity in South Asia will be the establishment of a just and lasting peace in Kashmir through dialogue and cooperation between India and Pakistan. Türkiye will continue to support steps taken in that direction.
We emphasize at every opportunity that we respect China’s territorial integrity and sovereignty. However, we will continue to express our sensitivity regarding the protection of the fundamental rights and freedoms of Uyghur Turks with whom we have strong historical and humanitarian ties. We are a country that has extended a helping hand to Rohingya Muslims living in difficult conditions in Myanmar and Bangladesh, since the very beginning. Our support for the displaced Rohingya will continue until their safe, voluntary, dignified and permanent return to their homeland is ensured.
Our goal of continuously improving relations with our neighbours, as well as with our friends in more distant locations, is an essential manifestation of our quest to respond more effectively to global challenges. The security of the energy supply is an important issue on the global agenda. We have made considerable investments over the past two decades to be self-sufficient. Energy should no longer be used as an instrument of hostility, but instead should be a vessel for solidarity and cooperation. Within that context, from the Black Sea to the Balkans, from the Caucasus to various parts of the world, we have always prioritized cooperation and solidarity and are striving to do more. In the area of transportation. Türkiye has the geopolitical position to support all projects that pass through or around it. Technological innovation should be seen as an opportunity to solve global and regional challenges, not as a trump card to increase competitiveness.
Regrettably, we are gradually moving away from the objective of zero hunger by 2030, which is one of the most important Sustainable Development Goals. Indeed, we find it difficult to accept hunger as an unresolved issue in the twenty-first century. We call on all countries to demonstrate a strong willingness to realize the Sustainable Development Goals, especially in this region, where wealth has skyrocketed. We cannot explain why 735 million of the world’s inhabitants continue to live in dire poverty. Hundreds of millions of dollars are being spent to reach space, but, from Africa to Asia, millions of people cannot even find a decent portion of food to consume. As long as that is the situation, none of us can be safe. As I said before, all countries should demonstrate a strong willing to realize the Sustainable Development Goals. We are one of the most generous countries in the world in terms of development aid, and we have the right to make this appeal.
Global climate change is another issue I would like to touch upon. It is becoming increasingly difficult to limit global temperature rise due to climate change to 1.5°C. One of the conditions required for that is financial and technological support for the efforts of developing countries. Food security is one of the main areas affected by climate change. We must develop and implement the right policies and investments for the sustainable use of water and land resources.
We cannot bequeath to our children a world plagued by pollution, caused by unconscientious consumption and depleted natural resources. With that understanding, we have taken the zero-waste movement — which we started in our country with the vision of a more liveable and fairer world — and brought it to the world, through a United Nations decision jointly presented by 105 countries, along with my spouse, the First Lady. Yesterday evening, we signed the goodwill declaration on zero waste at the Permanent Mission of Türkiye to the United Nations. We hope that our zero waste targets will contribute to combating climate change and achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. I would like to kindly invite all countries, international organizations and non-governmental organizations to support the zero-waste movement globally. 
The developed countries are suffering from racism as from a plague. They also suffer from xenophobia and Islamophobia. It has become unbearable and has reached intolerable levels. Hate speech, polarization and discrimination against innocent people leave no conscience untouched around the world. Unfortunately, populist politicians in many countries continue to play with fire by encouraging such dangerous trends.
The mindset that encourages the heinous attacks against the Holy Qur’an in Europe by allowing them under the guise of freedom of expression is essentially darkening the future of Europe with its own hands. Türkiye will continue to support initiatives to combat Islamophobia on all platforms, including at the United Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation. Regardless of which faith they might follow, no one can accept heinous attacks on holy spaces. I kindly ask all brotherly nations to follow those developments around the world.
Combating all those challenges, each of which I have tried to touch upon in a few sentences, is our common responsibility. We can fulfil that responsibility only through effective cooperation and solidarity. We believe that the ancient values that make humans who they are have been recently eroded. Those attacks pose a threat to the prosperity and welfare of the entire world. We have the family at the core of our endeavours, and we must protect and save them. Saving families will mean saving the future of the entire human race. Global impositions are on the rise in unprecedented fashion. That is why I kindly ask all Member States to support and protect the institution of the family.
We in the Republic of Türkiye, which celebrates its one-hundredth anniversary this year, will continue to take steps towards peace, prosperity and security for all for the benefit of the entire human race. I hope that the work of the General Assembly at its seventy-eighth session will strengthen the spirit of global cooperation and solidarity.
I would also like to take this opportunity to mention that the recent incidents between Armenia and Azerbaijan must be condemned and regional developments must be resolved immediately. That is what I hope and pray for.
I would once again like to convey greetings, love and respect to all members, and may they remain in good health.