I would like to congratulate the President of the General Assembly. His Excellency Mr. Dennis Francis. Ambassador of Trinidad and Tobago, as he takes over the helm of this organ at its seventy-eighth session. Tuvalu has full confidence and trust in his leadership in steering our canoe through the rough seas ahead of us. At this juncture. I would also like to acknowledge the outgoing President. His Excellency Mr. Csaba Korosi, for his stellar presidency, dedication and service to the Assembly throughout its seventy-seventh session.
In less than two weeks, my island nation of Tuvalu will be celebrating a momentous occasion, the forty-fifth anniversary of its independence. That event has great significance in the history of our nation, symbolizing our journey through self-governance and sovereignty. It is with a deep sense of gratitude that I express my people’s heartfelt appreciation to the United Nations and its Member States for their unwavering support in recognizing Tuvalu’s independence. That recognition was further solidified 23 years ago, when Tuvalu officially became a Member State of the Organization in September 2000. Tuvalu’s membership in the United Nations serves as more than just a symbolic gesture — it represents a beacon of hope for our country, assuring us of the international community’s commitment to safeguarding our sovereignty, even in the face of multifaceted challenges and existential threats. The United Nations, with its noble values centred around peace, security and prosperity, radiates hope and assurance to small and vulnerable nations such as Tuvalu. Our membership in it gives us confidence in our ability to navigate these uncertain times and reinforces our belief that we are not alone in our pursuit of a prosperous and secure future. 
I would like to take a moment to express Tuvalu’s heartfelt condolences to all who have been affected by recent natural disasters. Our hearts go out to the victims of the earthquake in Morocco and the flash flooding in Libya this month, as well as the wildfires in Hawaii in August. We also want to express our sympathy to those who have suffered as a result of the conflicts in Africa and the war in Ukraine.
Turning now to this year’s theme. Tuvalu wholeheartedly embraces the powerful narrative put forth by the President of the Assembly at its seventy-eighth session, as it aligns perfectly with our goal of creating a sustainable future for our nation and the world at large. It is imperative that we demonstrate unwavering commitment to the principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and prioritize the wellbeing of our planet and all its inhabitants. To fulfil that theme, we must first focus on rebuilding trust among nations and international institutions. The erosion of trust has impeded global cooperation and stymied progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). We must work to repair relationships, promote transparent and accountable governance and foster an environment of collaboration and mutual respect. By doing that, we can restore faith in international institutions and cultivate partnerships that will enable us to effectively address the challenges of our time.
Similarly, reigniting global solidarity requires us to prioritize peace-building efforts. Peace is a fundamental prerequisite for sustainable development, as conflicts and instability hinder progress towards the SDGs. We must invest in conflict prevention, peacekeeping and post-conflict reconstruction to ensure that communities can thrive and work effectively towards achieving the Goals outlined in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Accelerating action on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its Sustainable Development Goals requires collective effort and collaboration on a global scale. We must recognize that we are all interconnected and that the prosperity and well-being of each individual nation ultimately impacts 
the entire planet. Tuvalu therefore welcomes this year’s theme because it entails rebuilding trust, promoting global solidarity, prioritizing peace-building, fostering prosperity and advancing sustainability, which can help us make significant strides towards a more equitable, peaceful and sustainable future for all.
Let me now reflect on the important events of the high-level week that have been taking place alongside the general debate. Tuvalu applauds the two-day SDG Summit, which served as an important platform for Member States to collectively assess the progress made towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and provides an opportunity to recognize and address the specific challenges that every country faces in pursuit of the Goals. As a small island developing State. Tuvalu faces unique and pressing issues in meeting the targets set forth in the SDGs. The greatest challenge to the sustainable development that we are striving to achieve for our people is the fundamental threat of climate change and rising sea levels. As a low-lying island State. Tuvalu is particularly vulnerable to the adverse impacts of climate change, such as extreme weather events, which affect our ability to achieve our SDG targets. Despite those challenges. Tuvalu remains fully committed to the SDGs and acknowledges the importance of forging strong partnerships, particularly through SDG 17. Collaborative efforts with other Member States and international organizations and stakeholders are vital to mobilizing support and resources for addressing Tuvalu’s unique contextual challenges and achieving the shared objectives of sustainable development. By focusing on those central issues and utilizing the SDGs as a guiding framework. Tuvalu aims to build a resilient future while preserving its culture and environment and ensuring the welfare of its people.
We commend the Secretary-General for convening the Climate Ambition Summit, a pivotal moment for global climate action. We are not calling for sympathy but rather for solutions. In hindsight, climate justice should be at the forefront of our efforts as we address the urgent need for mitigation, adaptation and support for the most vulnerable nations. We embrace the efforts and collective support for resolution 77/276, championed by Vanuatu, for an advisory opinion from the International Court of Justice aimed at reinforcing States’ responsibility under international law to safeguard the climate system. It is the hope of Tuvalu that international law will provide the moral punch to enable us to phase out fossil fuels and hold polluters responsible.
Furthermore, at this point I would like to mention that just last week, the Prime Minister of Antigua and Barbuda and I had the privilege of appearing before the judges of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea in Hamburg. Our purpose was to present our arguments and submissions regarding an advisory opinion similar to that of Vanuatu but relating to the obligations of States parties under Part XII of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, specifically in terms of protecting and preserving the marine environment in relation to the impacts of climate change, including ocean warming, sea level rise and ocean acidification. Tuvalu urges all Member States to support Vanuatu. Antigua and Barbuda and Tuvalu by submitting endorsements of the advisory opinions’ objectives. It is crucial for us to come together in pursuit of climate justice, as the urgency of the matter cannot be overstated. We eagerly anticipate swift action from the judicial branches of the Organization because justice delayed is justice denied.
We applaud the Secretary-General for organizing the Summit of the Future, as it highlights the immense importance of ensuring a prosperous future for everyone. The world is witnessing a rapid and transformative shift towards a digital era, and we believe that embracing that digital transformation is crucial to the progress of the global community, particularly small island developing States such as Tuvalu. The vision for digital transformation under our Future Now project advocates the idea of creating a digital nation that maps and preserves Tuvalu’s identity and values for us and our future generations. That digital revolution will ensure that no one is left behind, as it empowers individuals and communities with knowledge, connectivity and access to essential services. For Tuvalu, the adoption of a digital nation approach will have a profound impact on our ability to address resource-related and geographic challenges. It will enable Tuvaluans to access education, health care and economic opportunities that were previously out of reach. By embracing digital technologies. Tuvalu will equip itself with the tools to implement innovative solutions that address climate and environmental concerns. Overall, the concept of a digital nation and the digital transformation that it entails are pivotal to harnessing progress, inclusivity and sustainability for Tuvalu and the entire world.
Despite our vision of a digital nation, it is crucial to acknowledge that our ultimate future as a recognized sovereign State depends on our ability to strengthen our 
resilience. In pursuing that goal. Tuvalu has developed a comprehensive long-term adaptation plan. In serving as our flagship survival adaptation project, the Long-Term Adaptation Plan is aimed at addressing the imminent threat of rising sea levels by reclaiming and elevating our land territory. That ambitious endeavour is crucial to ensuring that Tuvalu can provide a sustainable habitat for its population well into the next century and beyond. By prioritizing the Plan. Tuvalu is taking proactive steps to secure the nation’s survival and create a resilient future for its people.
I would now like to highlight our specific aspirations and initiatives. As a country whose physical existence, lives and livelihoods are at stake. Tuvalu cannot afford to take a back seat and be a spectator while others manoeuvre to satisfy their own interests in our multilateral process for addressing climate change, particularly sea level rise. On the heels of our successful Rising National Initiative, which we launched this time last year, we have proposed establishing a coalition for addressing sea level rise and its existential threats. The initiative is aimed at bringing together like-minded States and stakeholders to collectively address the pressing issue of protecting statehood, sovereignty, territorial integrity and livelihoods in the face of rising sea levels. Tuvalu believes that the coalition has a unique role in highlighting and addressing the impact of climate change and sea level rise on vulnerable nations. The aim is to attract greater attention and action from the international community by amplifying the voices of small island developing States and other nations facing similar challenges. Tuvalu expresses gratitude to countries and stakeholders, in particular Germany, who have already shown interest in joining this important endeavour.
In addition to the coalition initiative. Tuvalu calls for stronger global action on phasing out fossil fuel production and consumption. At the Climate Ambition Summit on Wednesday this week. Tuvalu made a call for countries to join it, alongside Vanuatu and other Pacific nations, to negotiate a fossil fuel non-proliferation treaty, a new instrument that would reduce reliance on fossil fuels, promote sustainable development through accelerating the just transition to renewable energy sources and curb greenhouse gas emissions.
Tuvalu, as an island State surrounded by the ocean, is fully committed to the signing and effective implementation of the Agreement under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Marine Biological Diversity of Areas beyond National Jurisdiction. Our unison with others to sign the Agreement this week is a testament to our genuine commitment to the values and purpose of that international legal instrument. Given our heavy reliance on fisheries and marine resources, by signing the Agreement. Tuvalu pays tribute to the importance of preserving the health and diversity of the ocean ecosystems for both its own sustainability and the well-being of the global community.
The Preamble of the Charter of the United Nations begins with “We the peoples...”. It is a powerful statement by this body to underscore respect for human dignity and human rights as equal peoples — men and women, boys and girls — of all races and colours. It entails the inclusivity, non-discrimination and oneness of humankind that the United Nations must uphold. Sadly, many people and communities have not been given the same treatment. Tuvalu therefore calls on this body to ensure the participation of everyone worldwide, including the people of Taiwan. We must make the necessary arrangements for Taiwan to meaningfully participate in relevant United Nations specialized agencies and mechanisms. Taiwan must be allowed to participate in key United Nations organizations because Taiwan is widely known for being an able, trustworthy and willing partner, greatly contributing to collective efforts that address pressing global issues under the purview of the United Nations agencies.
It is unfortunate that the people of Cuba still endure the economic hardships imposed by long-standing unilateral economic blockades. Those blockades not only disregard human rights but also go against the principles of cooperation emphasized in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The decision to maintain those measures has deprived Cuba of much-needed international development assistance and partnerships crucial for its recovery and future development.
For Tuvalu, peace is not merely the absence of conflict, it is the presence of justice, equality and opportunity. It is giving hope to our people by securing a prosperous future. And prosperity, for us. Tuvalu, is not just economic growth. It is the ability to protect the well-being of our people and our planet through social and environmental sustainability.
To achieve those noble goals. Tuvalu is unyielding in its commitment to dialogue that entails representation and coalitions. We look at partnerships through this body for international cooperation that can establish 
tangible outcomes for the most vulnerable. By pooling our resources, sharing knowledge and standing in solidarity, we can overcome obstacles and accelerate meaningful progress.
I would like to conclude by presenting a compelling challenge to this Organization. It is not enough for us to simply acknowledge our unique role; we must also actively demonstrate our commitment to defending and promoting the core values and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. It is of utmost importance that we remain unwavering in our dedication to collective action and inclusivity, embodying the Tuvalu cultural principles of kaitasi and falepili — the concepts of caring, sharing, being good neighbours and leaving no one behind — all for the sake of the sustainable and secure future we envision to have for our young generation and their children.
By embodying those noble concepts in our actions, we have the potential to create a brighter and more promising future for humankind and our planet. Let us always bear in mind that the choices we make and the actions we take today will echo through countless generations to come. Time is of the essence. The clock is ticking. The sun is setting. It is now or never.
