This session of the General Assembly is being held under new and extremely complex geopolitical, economic and climatic conditions and challenges, which requires us all to find innovative solutions, change our traditional way of addressing those challenges and, first and foremost, end the long-standing suffering of our Yemeni people. The theme of this debate seems to have been carefully designed to meet the demands of our people and Governments, rebuild confidence in our national and international institutions, and promote global solidarity in support of the Sustainable Development Goals towards peace, prosperity and progress for all.
My brother members of the Presidential Leadership Council, the Government and the Yemeni people commend the solidarity and unified position of the international community in support of constitutional legitimacy. Yemen’s sovereignty and independence, its territorial integrity, and non-interference in its internal affairs. We also appreciate the unified political position of the international community on the Yemeni issue and thank our brethren in the Coalition to Support Legitimacy in Yemen, led by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, for their solidarity with our people. Their positions represented a strong bulwark against the collapse of Yemeni State institutions and strengthened our resolve in the face of the Houthi militias, supported by the guardianship of the Islamic jurist regime in Iran and the terrorist organizations allied with it.
Last year, my country witnessed a historic transformation, whereby the institutions of Yemeni legitimacy were rebuilt and the Presidential Leadership Council was created on the basis of strengthened partnership, peace-building and ending the war. However, despite that important national transformation and the regional and international momentum to revive the political process, peace remained elusive, notwithstanding the concessions and initiatives made by the Yemeni Government in support of that path. 
With the resumption of the laudable efforts of our brothers in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the Sultanate of Oman, as well as those of the United Nations and United States envoys, our hopes have been revived that the Houthi militias will submit to the popular, regional and international will and recognize the fact that the State’s role as guarantor of rights, freedoms and the enforcement of the rule of law on the basis of justice and equal citizenship is the only way to make our country safer, more stable and more respected in its regional and international surroundings. That is the logic of the legitimate Government and the ultimate goal of any efforts for sustainable peace, which require broad partnership without discrimination or exclusion, and the foundation for a brighter future.
Today I do not believe that the Government has any further time or concessions to offer to convince the Houthi militias to change their position. We can predict their intentions for decades to come. If we do make any such compromises, that approach will return our people to the era of slavery, frustration and oblivion. Our country could even become a hotspot for exporting terrorism, which would trigger a regional and international conflict that cannot be contained through diplomatic means. Therefore, any complacency on the part of the international community or neglect of the legal status of the State, or even dealing with the militias as a de facto authority, would make it impossible to eliminate the practice of repression and the violation of public freedoms.
Based on our understanding of the approach of the Houthi militias, peace offers are nothing to them but test balloons to be dealt with from a tactical perspective to control more resources and postpone decisions on military confrontation until better conditions are achieved. That is why they repudiated all previous agreements, including the latest which is the Stockholm Agreement. Therefore, we stress the need to provide adequate guarantees for peace, which must be based on the three agreed nationally, regionally and internationally terms of reference. We must respect international legitimacy, pursuant to the Saudi initiative. In addition, sustainable peace must be based on justice and fairness and address the effects of the past and the main outstanding issues of the national dimension. Furthermore, any peace initiative or confidence-building measure must be able to achieve tangible and immediate results in order to alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people and benefit the victims of the conflict, not the leadership of armed militias. Women and children must be the first beneficiaries.
Moreover, sustaining peace and ending the war is the basis of the desired peace that will guarantee the Yemenis their ability to build a State of institutions that protects the rights, freedoms and equality among its citizens and establish good-neighbourly relations and common interests with our brothers in the Gulf Cooperation Council countries.
Today I believe that there is a more secure path to achieve peace and embody the theme of this session by restoring Yemenis’ confidence in international legitimacy and their national Government. That will require us to support the legitimate Government and enhance its ability to build the economy and provide services, thus helping us to address the militias’ blackmail, which is obstructing the implementation of international resolutions, and reviving hope for the better and bright tomorrow promoted by United Nations envoys and mediators everywhere.
I also believe that the mission of our international system is to protect stability and global peace and to support the will of the peoples and their recognized national Governments. That can easily be achieved today, given the ease of obtaining information and determining the facts. However, prioritizing interests over the will of the people would weaken confidence in this institution and the entire international community. I say that not to shirk our national responsibilities or make the international community a scapegoat for our failures, but because we believe that the major Powers must send a forceful message to the militias and the architects of coups against constitutional legitimacy, not only in Yemen but throughout the world, so as to clear the path towards peace and dispel the dreams of armed groups and those who aspire to power and their delusions of creating entities to compete with legitimate Governments.
In order to restore trust and achieve progress on the Yemeni dossier, we must recognize that the track based on international humanitarian interventions should be reconsidered and addressed radically so as to align it with the principles of international law and efforts to combat the financing of terrorism, rebellion and armed groups.
We welcome the United Nations efforts to move from relief interventions in my country towards sustainable development. That transformation must 
include pooling international pledges and funds through the Central Bank of Yemen so as to strengthen our national currency, curb inflation and ensure that those funds do not indirectly fall into the hand of armed militias.
We must acknowledge that this supporting path contradicts the international rhetoric calling for an improvement in the indicators of Yemen’s economy at a time when its international operations are channelled through institutions under the control of the Houthi militias, despite their arbitrary measures to violate the independence of the banking sector and the confidentiality of its dealings and to turn that sector into a money-laundering network, plundering private and public resources as well as citizen depositors. Moving forward with that approach would leave the State institutions of Yemen, a United Nations Member State, weak, underfunded and lacking sufficient resources to address those cross-border challenges and the country’s growing humanitarian needs. Furthermore, those policies threaten to fuel the war economy and allow the flow of funds and pledges through banking outlets that are not subject to accountability and effective oversight.
The humanitarian interventions of the Yemeni Government prove that its support for improving basic services will make the lives of Yemenis men and women better and strengthen the prospects for peace by mobilizing people around their interests in development and prosperity, and not the slogans of violence, death and hatred espoused by the Houthi militias.
As I said from this rostrum last year:
“Every year passes without the adoption of a robust position on the Yemeni dossier, while our losses pile up and the militias and terrorist groups become increasingly dangerous in their transnational threats and perpetrate stark violations of human rights that have been the subject of consensus within the Organization for more than 70 years now.” (A/77/PV8, p.10)
Indeed, this year we are witnessing a rapid growth in threats from Al-Qaida and Da’esh, which are fuelled by the Houthi militias and the Iranian regime with money, weapons and intelligence support, and by sharing with them the same Takfiri thought.
When I spoke here a year ago from this rostrum, the State’s general budget was achieving the best indicators since the outbreak of the war. We were able to launch promising programmes to improve services and create job opportunities, but the momentum was halted and remains paralysed by Houthi terrorist attacks on oil installations that have put the country on the brink of a comprehensive humanitarian crisis.
I take this opportunity to say that, without the generous support that the Government received from our brothers in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia last month through a financial grant of $1.2 billion in support of the State’s general budget, the Government would have been unable to meet its basic obligations, including the payment of salaries. In that context, we also note the humanitarian and development funding and pledges from our brothers in the United Arab Emirates, our friends in the United States of America, the European Union countries, the United Kingdom and the rest of the regional and international partners.
Despite all those humanitarian interventions. I note that the Houthi militias have recently escalated their threats against shipping lines in the Red Sea, the Bab Al-Mandab and the Gulf of Aden, which they treat as military zones. They have tested new weapons on Yemeni islands and targeted commercial ships and oil tankers. In that way, the militias and the Iranian regime behind them continue to destabilize the security and stability of the region and undermine efforts to renew the truce and resume the political process. Today. 21 September, they are showing off their military capabilities on the occasion of the Nakba, when they overturned the national consensus and the legitimate constitution.
Today we reiterate the importance of ensuring freedom of international navigation, combating extremism, terrorism and piracy, and supporting measures aimed at preventing the spread of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, most notably Iran’s nuclear programme, ballistic missiles and destructive role in the region. We once again call on the international community to condemn Iran’s blatant interference in the affairs of our country and its efforts to make it a platform for cross-border threats and to subject it to sanctions approved in accordance with the resolutions of international legitimacy related to the Yemeni dossier. In that context, we call on Member States to commit to the arms embargo and face up to Iran’s destabilizing influence while preventing it from supplying its militias with military technologies such as ballistic missiles and drones, which are used to commit terrorist acts against innocent civilians. 
The Presidential Leadership Council and the Government stress their firm commitment to all international conventions and treaties, including those protecting children and preventing their involvement in armed conflict. They are also committed to providing the necessary guarantees for the work of international organizations and facilitating access of their aid to all those in need throughout Yemen. To strengthen those efforts, the Government is working to enable the Independent National Commission to investigate allegations of human rights violations and the relevant international and United Nations mechanisms to fulfil their tasks unconditionally.
I note that all the understandings reached by the United Nations agencies with the Houthi militias have not been implemented so far, as those militias continue to recruit children and mobilize them in combat camps under the very eyes of the international community. The Houthi militias commit gross violations of human rights every day, including by restricting travel, work, women’s education and suppressing journalists.
The Republic of Yemen stresses its firm position towards the Palestinian question. We will continue to support the path towards peace and a comprehensive and just solution to the Palestinian question on the basis of the resolutions of international legitimacy and the Arab Peace Initiative, in a way that guarantees the right of the Palestinian people to establish their independent State. We also affirm our support for all endeavours aimed at bringing peace to the Sudan, first and foremost the efforts of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the Arab Republic of Egypt and the United States to restore security, stability and development to that dear country.
I also cannot fail to offer my full solidarity and sincere condolences to my brothers in Libya and the Kingdom of Morocco because of the devastating hurricanes and earthquakes that struck those two brotherly countries. We reiterate our appreciation and thanks to all our brothers who have supported those two countries, especially the sisterly Arab Republic of Egypt, as the dangers of climate change are increasingly threatening our global system.
