At the outset, I am pleased to extend to Mr. Csaba Korosi my warmest congratulations on his assumption of the presidency of the General Assembly at its current session, and to wish him every success in performing his tasks. I also thank Mr. Abdulla Shahid for his distinguished presidency of the seventy-sixth session.
I also cannot but to reiterate to Secretary-General Antonio Guterres our full support for his efforts and endeavours aimed at improving the performance of our Organization and strengthening its role in accordance with the three pillars of the Charter of the United Nations, namely, security, development and human rights.
Our session is taking place as the world is witnessing escalating tensions that threaten to have serious repercussions on the system of international relations, especially in light of the resurgence of the phenomenon of polarization, as is the case with the Ukraine crisis and its negative repercussions, which will significantly exacerbate existential challenges in vital areas. That situation, with its complexities and dilemmas, which are difficult to anticipate in all their aspects in the current circumstances, highlights more than ever the structural imbalances that characterize global governance mechanisms and the urgent need to address them through an approach that ensures parity and equality among all countries and puts an end to the long-standing marginalization of developing countries.
The profound transformations we are witnessing today, despite the difficulties they entail, give us opportunities to correct the path we are on and to work to uphold the principles and purposes upon which our Organization was founded. We therefore fully agree with the theme of the current session and believe that we are truly at a watershed moment in advancing multilateral action in the face of common challenges that prove day after day that our collective security is closely linked to the stability and prosperity of all our peoples, without exception.
My country, which this year celebrates the sixtieth anniversary of the restoration of its national independence and while resolutely pursuing the process of building a new Algeria under the leadership of President Abdelmadjid Tebboune, stresses its commitment to those values and principles and its determination to make its contribution to maintaining international peace and security and achieving comprehensive, just and sustainable development.
In that spirit, Algeria is preparing to host an important summit of Arab countries on 1 and 2 November, and looks forward to making that event a milestone in the process of joint Arab action towards a more effective contribution by the Group of Arab States to addressing current regional and international challenges. In that context, and in preparation for that important event, Algeria is pursuing its efforts to strengthen national unity among our Palestinian brothers in the light of the initiative launched by the President of the Republic, Mr. Abdelmadjid Tebboune, in line with the efforts of many sisterly Arab countries in this regard.
From this rostrum, I reaffirm that addressing the Palestinian question remains key to restoring security and stability in the Middle East region by consecrating the right of the brotherly Palestinian people to establish their independent State on the borders of 4 June 1967, with Jerusalem as its capital, and ending the occupation of the Syrian Golan, in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. In that regard, Algeria affirms its support for the request submitted by the State of Palestine for full membership of the United Nations, and looks forward to welcoming it soon as the 194th State Member of the United Nations.
With the same determination, Algeria reiterates once again its support for the right of the brotherly people of Western Sahara to end the occupation of their lands and to exercise their inalienable and imprescriptible right to self-determination and independence. We call on the United Nations to redouble its efforts, through the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for Western Sahara, Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to help the two parties to the conflict — two States members of the African Union, namely, the Kingdom of Morocco and the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic — to resume the course of direct negotiations with a view to reaching a political solution acceptable to both parties within the framework of international legitimacy.
Proceeding from its principled positions and adherence to the principles of non-alignment and by virtue of its rich history and experience in the field of international mediation, Algeria stresses the need for the international community to go beyond the logic of crisis management and focus instead on the search for solutions. Whether the issue is related to cross-border threats or local conflicts, Algeria believes that the only way to sustainably break the vicious cycle of such crises is by addressing their root causes.
In that context, and in view of its leadership of the international mediation process and chairmanship of the Monitoring Committee on the implementation of the Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Republic of Mali, emanating from the Algiers process, my country calls on the international community to support the Malian parties with a view to accelerating the implementation of all their commitments in light of the current delicate transitional phase in that brotherly country.
On neighbouring Libya, we stress once again the need to address the core of the crisis by ending foreign interference in all its forms in the affairs of that brotherly country, and to accompany the Libyan parties towards formulating the necessary agreements to move towards achieving the goals of national reconciliation and organizing free and fair elections that respond to the aspirations of the brotherly Libyan people to build their democratic and modern State.
At the regional level, the Sahel-Sahara region remains vulnerable to the challenges posed by the spread of terrorist threats and cross-border crimes against the background of the expansion of institutional instability, the exacerbation of development problems and the effects of climate change. Faced with those crisis situations, and by virtue of its responsibilities as the African Union coordinator for efforts to combat terrorism and violent extremism, as well as its policy of good-neighbourliness and solidarity, Algeria intends to intensify its efforts, in coordination with the concerned countries, to establish a new dynamic for the mechanisms of joint regional action so as to ensure joint and effective responses commensurate with the challenges posed by the threat of terrorism to all the peoples of the region.
Algeria is also working with its brothers from neighbouring countries to promote economic integration and sustainable development with a view to achieving shared prosperity that will enable the realization of the Sustainable Development Goals and strengthen peace and security in the region.
In that regard, I stress that Algeria, which is proud of its African affiliation, remains an active party in
the project of integration, prosperity and political and economic independence of the African continent. That can be achieved by eliminating the consequences of external interventions and moving to develop African solutions to African problems. We therefore call on the international community to accompany the positive dynamic of the African continent by meeting its commitments and supporting the African Union Agenda 2063, which reflects a common vision for the future of the continent, while encouraging the establishment of balanced partnerships that respect the sovereign decisions taken by the countries of the African continent within the framework of the African Union.
We also firmly believe that recent developments have proven beyond any doubt that our African continent, the cradle of humankind and in no way resembling the stereotyped image promoted about it, is capable of presenting a new model of human civilization that places human beings and their environment at centre stage and paves the way for establishing friendly relations among States on the basis of justice and equality.
In the midst of these developments and aware of the magnitude of the unprecedented challenges at the international and regional levels, Algeria has submitted its candidacy for non-permanent membership of the Security Council for the period 2024-2025. Its candidacy has been endorsed by the African Union, the League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Algeria, which looks forward to enjoying the support of Member States in the elections scheduled for June next year, is committed to upholding the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations and will work with the other members of the Council to give greater effectiveness to international efforts to prevent the outbreak of conflicts and resolve them through peaceful means. We will also support the role of active regional organizations, encourage the prominent participation of women and young people in resolving crises and ensure the necessary protection for all vulnerable groups.
Undoubtedly, the international community is today at a critical juncture and required to take bold decisions to preserve its collective security and explore prospects for a promising future for all humankind. From that perspective, Algeria recognizes the need to avoid the mistakes of the past and their consequences and calls for the consolidation of all our efforts to ensure the success of the reform path, leading to the establishment of a global system of equity, equality in sovereignty, mutual interests and constructive cooperation.
We need, now more than ever, to work together and be guided by the principle of our common destiny so as to avoid dangerous mistakes that threaten the return of the darkest chapters of contemporary human history.