We would like to extend to the President of the General Assembly and his friendly country the Republic of Hungary our congratulations on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session. We express our solidarity with him and all Member States to ensure the successful work of the Assembly during this session. We also appreciate the efforts of the former President at the previous session.
We would be remiss not to thank and commend His Excellency Secretary-General Antonio Guterres for his tireless efforts in leading this Organization and advancing its noble missions while developing its working methods to enhance its effectiveness and adapt to the current needs. We assure him that the Sultanate of Oman will continue to support his efforts in achieving justice and peace all over the world.
The Sultanate of Oman pursues a well-established policy based on a deep and steadfast vision, as well as a legacy drawn from its cultural heritage and human history. Therefore, it affirms the fundamentals of its foreign policy in siding with truth and justice, strengthening constructive cooperation and the bonds of friendship, and contributing to the consolidation of international peace and security.
The Sultanate of Oman is confident that establishing and maintaining peace in the world is necessary for the interests of its peoples. That can only be preserved on the basis of sound principles of justice and firm foundations of cooperation and harmony among all nations. We call on the international community to be guided by those principles and to build partnerships among countries in accordance with international law and customary practices that are unanimously accepted in order to achieve peaceful coexistence, enhanced cooperation and economic prosperity.
My country continues to spare no effort to achieve peace in brotherly Yemen through constructive cooperation with all parties. While the Sultanate of Oman welcomes the continued truce, it appeals to all Yemeni actors to come to terms with their painful past and focus on formulating an optimistic and happy future for their country that will preserve its unity, security and stability, based on the agreed terms of reference, including the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative, the outcome of the intra-Yemeni dialogue and the relevant United Nations resolutions.
In that context, the Sultanate of Oman will continue to support the efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, Mr. Hans Grundberg, and the United States Special Envoy for Yemen, Mr. Tim Lenderking. We appreciate their endeavours to achieve a lasting peace in Yemen through dialogue. We also call on all Yemeni parties to engage in a meaningful and serious manner in order to implement the road map agreed upon by our Yemeni brothers and to establish a political process that will safeguard the sovereignty, independence, security and stability of Yemen. My country affirms that it will continue to provide all possible facilities and humanitarian assistance to the various Yemeni regions and governorates without exception, in the hope that sustained international action will bring an end to the suffering of the brotherly people of Yemen.
Resolving the Palestinian question remains an essential pillar of ensuring stability in the Middle East. That conflict has generated many crises, tensions and acts of violence. Therefore, we believe that a two-State solution, in accordance with international resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, is an urgent need and a strategic necessity for achieving lasting peace, mutual trust and positive cooperation among all parties in the region.
We also note the unfolding developments in Libya, Syria and the Sudan. We hope that differences will be resolved by consensus among the political parties and that the concept of a shared destiny will be consolidated in order to achieve security and stability for those sisterly countries.
We call on the international community to redouble its diplomatic efforts to support peace and stability in order to resolve the Russian-Ukrainian crisis through dialogue and negotiation, which are the most successful means of resolving differences, in accordance with the principles of international law and common human values.
My country looks forward to participating actively in the twenty-seventh Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP27), which will be held in Sharm el- Sheikh, Egypt, in November. We wish the sisterly Arab Republic of Egypt success in hosting that conference.
Climate change is one of the most prominent issues of our time, and we are now at a decisive moment. The world is facing a real and difficult challenge with wide-ranging effects, whether rising temperatures or catastrophic floods, all of which are threats to countries’ food security. Adapting to those issues will be more difficult and costly unless the world unites to address them in a radical and integrated way. In that regard, Oman has developed a national strategy for protecting the environment and addressing climate change to be managed in partnership with local communities, civil- society institutions and the private sector. We have established a national committee for climate change and the protection of the ozone layer, consisting of 31 governmental agencies through which adaptation plans are implemented to mitigate the effects of climate fluctuations and to contribute to reducing carbon emissions by 7 per cent by 2030, in accordance with the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. We are thereby moving towards achieving zero greenhouse-gas emissions.
My country is focused on accelerating the procedures for regulating the green hydrogen sector and encouraging investment in it, in response to global transformations aimed at reducing carbon emissions and fulfilling the world’s desire for new and multiple-use energy sources. In view of the importance of strengthening that sector, my country has established a national alliance for hydrogen by relying on our national capabilities, including an abundance of solar and wind energy, in addition to suitable lands for establishing such projects. And thanks to Oman’s favourable geographic location on the world map, we also have a port system and logistical support for developing and producing clean energy.
My country bases its principles of equality, justice and non-discrimination among society’s various segments on our nation’s State statute. Omani women, with their diverse political, social, economic and cultural views, are therefore able to contribute alongside men to building our modern State and promoting cooperation and harmony among all. Women are key partners in development and a true component of our society. We are proud of what we have achieved in the advancement of women and their valuable national contribution in the areas of action and social responsibility. Young people play an equally great role in embodying promising hopes and a bright future for comprehensive development. My country has provided various incentives and opportunities that are characterized by fairness, transparency and equal opportunities for all.
The successive crises and existing conflicts that we are seeing have unquestionably all created challenges for the United Nations system. We therefore call on the international community to use genuine and realistic partnerships to rebuild, by uniting ranks and forgiving obstructive lapses while moving forward with a positive vision for a more promising future for all humankind.
In conclusion, we want to wish for peace for all. We also wish the Assembly every success in this session with a view to enabling us to achieve the hopes and aspirations of our world. And we hope that members will enjoy the remarkable and memorable FIFA World Cup competition to be held in our sister State of Qatar in November.