At the outset, it is my pleasure to congratulate His Excellency Mr. Csaba Korosi on assuming the presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session. I wish him every success. I express our appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Abdulla Shahid, President of the General Assembly at its seventy-sixth session, for his efforts. We also highly value the efforts of the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Antonio Guterres, to enhance the role of the United Nations and achieve its goals.
Our world has become a global village. Our issues and concerns are intertwined, and our world is changing at an accelerated pace. The effects of any environmental incident, economic crisis or military confrontation reverberate globally. However, our approaches and methods have not developed at the same pace to keep abreast of those revolutionary changes. Whether one believes that our world is unipolar or multipolar, global policy is still being managed according to the logic of the uneven capacities and different interests and priorities of States, and not according to the logic of one world and one humankind. I mean specifically that global crises are being managed on the basis of narrow and short-term interests, the marginalization of international law and the management of differences according to balances of power rather than the Charter of the United Nations and respect for State sovereignty. We lack mechanisms sufficient to deter and punish those who violate State sovereignty. The international community is unable to impose the settlements of conflicts when the stronger parties reject such settlements. In such circumstances, the behaviour of world leaders and their wisdom and
commitment to justice in dealing with relations among countries are important.
We are fully aware of the complexities of the conflict between Russia and Ukraine and its international dimension. However, we call for a ceasefire and a peaceful settlement because that is what ultimately will happen, regardless of how long this war goes on. Perpetuating the conflict will not change this result. It will only increase the number of casualties and double its disastrous repercussions on Europe, Russia and the global economy.
On a different note, I do not think that the representatives of the countries represented here need to be reminded that the Palestinian question remains without solution. Given the failure to implement the resolutions of international legitimacy and the continuous change of the situation on the ground, the occupation, with its settlement activities, is pursuing a policy of fait accompli. That may change the rules of the conflict and the format of global solidarity in the future. In this regard, I stress once again that we stand in full solidarity with the brotherly Palestinian people in their aspiration to achieve justice. The Security Council must shoulder its responsibility and compel Israel to end the occupation of Palestinian territories and to establish a Palestinian State within the borders of 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Moreover, in our region, the international community has not been able to hold war criminals in Syria to account. Even more disappointing is the fact that some are trying to turn the page on the suffering of the Syrian people, ignoring the significant sacrifices made by those blighted people and failing to fulfil their aspirations to the unity, peace and security of Syria.
The United Nations should not accept the restriction of the political track to the so-called Constitutional Committee under its auspices. The Syrian crisis has taught us an important lesson about what can happen when the international community lacks a long-term vision for addressing the suffering of peoples from unlimited injustice, destitution and civil wars. Soon enough, accompanying phenomena, such as the refugee issue, become another problem that requires a solution. We highly value the role played by countries that have hosted Syrian refugees. However, we must recall the importance of addressing the root causes of the problems before having to deal with their repercussions on our countries.
In Libya, we call for immediate measures to be taken at the international level to continue the political process. We also call for a constitution-based agreement on elections and the unification of State institutions. We all are aware that it is impossible to restore the State without unifying military forces and rehabilitating armed factions into one national army. Any party that rejects this solution must be denounced and held accountable.
In Yemen, there is a glimmer of hope as parties have agreed to a temporary truce. We look forward to a comprehensive, lasting ceasefire to pave the way for negotiations among the Yemeni parties, based on the outcomes of the national dialogue and the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative, in addition to relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution 2216 (2015).
We hope that national consensus will be achieved in Iraq, Lebanon and the Sudan. The political elites must be up to the task of ensuring that citizens are able to achieve their aspirations. That would ensure the unity of the people, the unity of the nation and diversity all at the same time. Not only is that possible; it is actually extremely realistic, provided that there is willingness to make concessions to reach settlements and abandon the sectarian, partisan quota approach that has been rejected by the younger generations.
We in Qatar believe in the need to achieve a just agreement on Iran’s nuclear programme that takes into account the concerns of all parties and establishes a region free of nuclear weapons. Such a solution should also recognize the right of the Iranian people to benefit from nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. There is no alternative to such an agreement, which would contribute to the stability and security of the region and open the door to further dialogue and the achievement of regional security.
In Afghanistan, we call on all parties to maintain and build on the gains of the Doha Agreement for Bringing Peace to Afghanistan. That includes ensuring that Afghanistan does not become a safe haven for extremist and terrorist groups. Only then will the Afghan people be able to enjoy long-awaited prosperity and stability. We have stressed time and again the importance of protecting civilians in Afghanistan and of respecting human rights, including women’s rights and the right of girls to education. We have also stressed the importance of achieving national reconciliation
among all segments of Afghani society and warned against isolating and besieging Afghanistan, which would be counterproductive.
Due to lack of global coordination and the rational and balanced planning of energy policies over many decades, we are now all facing an unprecedented energy crisis. Some 1 billion people around the world are living without a main reliable energy source. While the crisis of the war in Ukraine might be new, a political crisis turning into an energy crisis is not. This situation has been silently deteriorating since before the war in Ukraine. Decades of pressure to stop investing in fossil fuels before securing the environmentally friendly and sustainable alternatives that we must develop have led to significant shortages in energy supplies.
Undoubtedly, climate change and the protection of the environment in general compel us to diversify energy sources as soon as possible. However, we must continue to supply energy in the meantime. We must be realistic and recognize that the future of energy will include a combination of sustainable energy sources, such as solar energy, hydrogen, wind energy and also hydrocarbons. As Qatar has continued to invest in liquefied natural gas for decades, we are now able to expand our northern gas field. That will play a pivotal role in alleviating the crisis of energy shortages in many important parts of the world.
When it comes to basic commodities, such as energy, food and medication, exporters bear a special responsibility that exceeds commercial responsibility. They must be reliable, and they must respect agreements. Banning the transit, export and import of those commodities in times of political crisis and imposing blockades on affected countries is not acceptable. Neither is it acceptable to use those commodities as tools of conflict. They are not weapons. It is equally unacceptable to use water sources as if they were political tools.
While the world situation today paints a bleak picture of the future of humankind, we believe in dialogue and joint action. We believe in all parties attempting to understand each other — in putting themselves in one another’s shoes in order to see things from the perspective of others. Medium-sized and small countries are most in need of fixed rules that govern international relations. Relying on major Powers should not be a reason to abandon communication with one another. We all have a role to play. What appears today to be impossible will be a reality if we have the vision, the will and the good intentions.
Qatar’s approach focuses on national and human development. Our foreign policy is based on achieving a balance between principles and interests. We have also focused on mediation to settle disputes by using peaceful means. We are aware of our responsibility as a source of energy, and we have proved to be a reliable partner at the international level.
Qatar will welcome the world when we host the Football World Cup in November. This challenge, which started 12 years ago, required genuine determination and resolve, considerable planning and hard work. Today we are ready to receive teams and spectators from all over the world. We are opening our doors in Doha to them without discrimination so that they can all enthusiastically enjoy the football championship and witness the economic and cultural development in our country. The Football World Cup is being organized for the first time in a Muslim Arab country and in the Middle East in general. The world will witness that one of the small and medium-sized countries is able to host global events with exceptional success and to create an environment conducive to diversity and constructive interaction among the peoples of the world.
This event has already a positive effect in our region. Sisterly Arab nations have welcomed the so- called Hayya Card, which offers a visa to enter Qatar and other Arab countries. The Hayya Card has been welcomed by the public as well and incentivized Arab nations to look forward to a future where there are no barriers among peoples.
The Qatari people will open their arms to welcome football fans from all over the world. To quote the Holy Qur’an,
“We created you from a single (pair) of a male and a female, and made you into nations and tribes, that ye may know each other” (The Holy Qur’an, XLIX.13).
Regardless of our different nationalities, religions and ideologies, our duty is to overcome barriers and extend the hand of friendship to build bridges of understanding and value our common humanity. On behalf of my people and myself, I invite everyone here to come to Qatar and to enjoy this unique Football World Cup. I welcome you all. May peace, mercy and blessings of God be upon you.