At the outset, I should like to congratulate His Excellency Mr. Csaba Korosi on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session. I wish him every success in his tasks.
I also thank Mr. Abdulla Shahid for his efforts during his presidency of the Assembly at its previous session. I commend the outstanding work of the Secretary-General to optimize the efficiency of the United Nations institutions to achieve the purposes of its Charter.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia stresses its commitment to the Charter of the United Nations and its tireless support for the principles of international legitimacy aimed at maintaining international peace and security. It pledges to cooperate on the basis of mutual respect for the sovereignty of States, to resolve disputes through peaceful means and to abstain from threatening or using force. My country participated in establishing the United Nations and signing the San Francisco Charter, based on the teachings of our true Islamic religion and genuine Arab traditions of justice, charity, cooperation, peace and dialogue.
The Kingdom has always supported international multilateral action, in accordance with United Nations principles, to strengthen international cooperation and address the challenges facing our world. My country actively participates in all efforts to achieve a more
just and peaceful world and a promising future for our peoples and future generations.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, eager to achieve the goals and purposes of the United Nations and maintain international peace and security, reiterates its call for Security Council reform to make it fairer in representing today’s world, more effective in dealing with the changes and developments of the international community, and more efficient in addressing its common challenges.
With regard to the wars and conflicts being waged throughout the world, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia stresses the need to heed the voice of reason and wisdom, and for dialogue, negotiations and peaceful solutions to end fighting, protect civilians and provide prospects for peace, security and development for all.
We support all international efforts capable of providing a political solution that will end the Russia- Ukraine crisis, stop the fighting and protect lives and property, while maintaining international and regional security stability. In the process of peacebuilding, overcoming challenges and achieving security, stability and prosperity with comprehensive economic development, we all need to pool our efforts, forge partnerships and promote cultural, civilizational and social exchange.
The Middle East region is in dire need of joint efforts to establish security and stability and ensure a better future that meets the aspirations of our peoples towards achieving development and prosperity. The Jeddah Security and Development Summit, in which leaders of the United States and nine Arab States participated, was an opportunity to confirm joint action for a better future for the region, its countries and peoples. We fully support the United Nations efforts to settle disputes peacefully; promote interdependence and integration regionally and internationally; strengthen cooperation based on the principles of the United Nations — respect for the sovereignty of States, non-interference in their internal affairs and respect for their independence, territorial integrity, values and cultures — while diversity enriches understanding and coexistence.
Security and stability in the Middle East swiftly require a just and comprehensive solution to the Palestinian question, pursuant to the resolutions of international legitimacy, the Arab Peace Initiative and the establishment of an independent Palestinian State within the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. We condemn all unilateral measures that would undermine the two-State solution and call for their immediate cessation.
With regard to Yemen, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia reiterates its commitment to all efforts to maintain the truce and allow the Presidential Leadership Council to play its full role in establishing sustainable peace among Yemeni brethren, in accordance with the three terms of reference, including resolution 2216 (2015). We continue to play our leading role as the major supporter in meeting the humanitarian and development needs of our brothers in Yemen. In that context, we stress the need to lift all obstacles to the inflow of basic goods and the delivery of assistance, and to open the roads to Ta’iz, Yemen’s third largest city, which has been under siege since 2015.
As the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is keen to support security, stability and development in Iraq, we have reinforced our bilateral and collective cooperation with it, including the flow of electricity among the Kingdom, Iraq and the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council.
My country insists that the relevant Security Council resolutions be respected to ensure the unity, stability and Arab nature of Syria, and supports the efforts of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to bring about a political solution to that conflict, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). We need to prevent a further outbreak of violence, respect the ceasefire agreements and ensure that humanitarian assistance can reach all Syrians in need unhindered.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia also supports the sovereignty, security and stability of Lebanon, and stresses the importance of implementing comprehensive political and economic structural reform that will ensure the country’s success in overcoming its current political and economic crisis. Lebanon should not be a stepping stone for terrorists, drug trafficking or other criminal activities that would threaten regional peace and stability. It is essential that the Lebanese Government be able to extend its control over all Lebanese territory, including the implementation of the relevant Security Council resolutions and the Taif Agreement.
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia continues to deploy all efforts towards the convening of a dialogue among the Sudanese parties, wishing the Sudan and its people stability and prosperity. We also reiterate our support for arrangements to meet the water needs of Egypt and the Sudan.
We reiterate our full support the Libyan ceasefire agreement signed on 23 October 2020 and the Libyan calls for departure of all foreign troops, fighters and mercenaries without delay, pursuant to resolution 2570 (2021).
The Kingdom reiterates the importance of supporting the security of Afghanistan and the continued delivery of humanitarian assistance to that country, which must not become a base for terrorist operations or a breeding ground for terrorism.
International peace and security cannot be established through an arms race or the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). Instead, they will be secured through cooperation among States for achieving development and progress. We call on the international community to step up its efforts to prevent the proliferation of WMDs and ensure that the Middle East is free of such weapons. We call on Iran to fulfil its nuclear obligations expeditiously and fully cooperate with the International Atomic Energy Agency and take serious measures to build confidence with its neighbours and the international community.
Humankind is facing common challenges that threaten economic recovery following the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, most notably the security and availability of food and energy, supply chains, the environment and climate change challenges. Our capacity to overcome those challenges very much depends on our collective efforts, strengthened cooperation and a balanced, fair and united international response. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is aware of the importance of cooperation to addressing the challenges of climate change and the need to deal with its negative effects. In that regard, we attach particular importance to implementing the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and supporting the gradual and responsible change towards diversified energy systems and sources that are more sustainable. Achieving these goals requires everyone’s participation, bearing in mind the different national and regional circumstances, countries’ differing socioeconomic situations, the world energy situation and the access of all to such energy.
In reaffirming our pioneering role in the area of sustainability, the Kingdom has launched the initiatives of the Green Saudi Arabia and the Green Middle East in support of national and regional efforts in that regard. We have announced ambitious goals to diversify sources of energy and optimize its production and consumption. We have also launched initiatives to protect the environment, promote sustainable forestation, reduce emissions by 278 million tons annually by 2030 and achieve zero carbon emissions by 2060 through the circular carbon reduction approach, in accordance with the Kingdom’s development plans and its diversified economy.
My country is also keen to support the world economy by contributing to ensuring balanced energy markets. We stress the importance of investing in fossil fuels and clean techniques in the coming two decades in order to meet the growing global demand and the interests of all consumers and producers, and to save the world from the negative consequences of unrealistic policies aimed at excluding the main sources of energy without considering the negative effects on world supply chains, inflation, high energy prices, increased unemployment rates and other security and socioeconomic effects.
The Kingdom, along with its international partners, works to mitigate the negative effects of armed conflicts and their painful repercussions on food security and 2030 Sustainable Development Goals, especially the goal to eradicate famine. In that regard, it is important to facilitate the export of grains and other foodstuffs, whose prices are skyrocketing, thereby threatening famine. My country contributes significantly to that issue. Our total contribution in food and agricultural assistance has now reached nearly $2.89 billion. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, along with our brothers in the region, has announced a $10-billion contribution to that end by coordinating and uniting the efforts of 10 national and regional development funds.
The international community has achieved successive successes in addressing terrorism and extremism. We must continue to work relentlessly to address and eradicate that scourge, which has no link to any race, religion or belief. We stress the importance for the international community to act firmly against States that support and sponsor terrorism and extremism and try to exploit their extremist ideology to expand and create chaos. The Kingdom is pursuing its efforts to promote construction and development in order to meet the aspirations of future generations and improve the quality of life, along with empowering women and youth to innovate and be open to dialogue, tolerance and coexistence.
The Kingdom attaches great importance to human rights, having drafted explicit texts to promote and protect them. My country has also announced legislation pertaining to reforms pursuant to our Saudi 2030 Vision with the aim of achieving better legal and judiciary systems, in accordance with better international practices and criteria aligned with the Kingdom’s commitments to international treaties and conventions. Pursuant to its ambitious vision for the future, my country has applied to host Expo 2030 under the theme: “The Era of Change: Leading the Planet to a Foresighted Tomorrow”. If we succeed in that candidacy, we wish to bring the exhibition closer in spirit to the idea for which it was created, namely, “Connecting Minds, Creating the Future”, with the aim of achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. We thank those countries that have supported us in our candidacy.
In conclusion, we hope that our efforts will help convey our messages, values and principles to the world in a spirit of partnership and respect for a better future of humankind as a whole.