It is a great honour for me to address the General Assembly on behalf of the Republic of Serbia. In view of our time limits, I ask everyone not to mind if I skip the burden of formalities, courtesy words and greetings to those who are present in or absent from this Hall, and instead speak directly about the essence of why we are gathered here.
I have been in this Hall so many times. The seriousness of the present moment obliges me to share difficult but true words with the Assembly. Everything we are doing here today seems at best relatively impotent and vague. Our words are hollow and empty echoes compared to the reality we are facing. And that reality is such that no one is listening to anyone here, no one strives to reach real agreements or resolve problems and almost all of us care only for our own interests, often breaching the basic principles of international law along the way and throwing away the Charter of the United Nations and other documents on which the Organization was founded. That is not the fault of Antonio Guterres or anyone from the United Nations. It is the fault of the Powers that care for nothing other than achieving their own political, economic and — unfortunately — military goals.
We are witness to the fact that the age we live in is characterized by a complex global geopolitical situation. Our general debate is being held while world peace is being undermined to an extent not seen since the Second World War and the subsequent founding
of our United Nations. The global challenges we are facing threaten to radically change the international security architecture and jeopardize the established international legal order. Such complex times demand enormous wisdom and unity if we are to preserve peace as the absolutely most important heritage woven into the foundations of our Organization.
That is why I would like to speak clearly and accurately to the Assembly about five key challenges we are facing today. The first is returning to peace and the preservation of global stability; the second is the preservation of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of internationally recognized States — members of the Organization — as a key principle of international public law and relations between the countries; the third is energy security in the throes of a global crisis; the fourth is the financial safety of poor and developing countries; and the fifth and last is about food supplies in the wake of the interruption of global supply chains by war.
First, the current global developments increasingly remind us that there can be no alternative to the principle of the peaceful resolution of disputes. That principle stands out today more than ever, and is best described in the words of the Preamble to the Charter, which urge that we “practice tolerance and live together in peace with one another as good neighbours”. Rejecting the use of force and ensuring the peaceful resolution of disputes are pillars of world stability, but they must be accompanied by principles such as non-selective observance of the Charter and the implementation of mandatory Security Council resolutions and the basic principles of the applicable international public law.
Secondly, regarding the preservation of the territorial integrity and sovereignty of internationally recognized States, Serbia supports the territorial integrity of all States Members of the United Nations, including, of course, the territorial integrity of Ukraine. In such a way, we behaved responsibly and seriously in this renowned institution. Nevertheless, we can hear from many speakers stories about aggression and violation of the territorial integrity of Ukraine. Many say that this was the first conflict on European soil since the Second World War. But the truth that the territorial integrity of a country in Europe — Serbia, as a matter of fact — that did not attack any other sovereign country was violated is constantly unspoken. We ask for a clear answer to the question that I have been asking my interlocutors, leaders of many countries, for years: what is the difference between the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine and the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia, which was grossly violated, and for which Member States, at least some, provided international recognition and legitimacy? No one has ever provided a rational answer to that question.
Let me recall the fact that Serbia has never stepped on someone else’s territory, and neither has it endangered the territorial integrity of a single sovereign State so that anyone might intervene or carry out aggression against it in the way in which that was done against Serbia in 1999. Nevertheless, as I said, that did not prevent the 19 richest NATO countries from attacking a sovereign country without a decision by the Security Council. The signing, upon termination of the armed conflict, of the agreement with NATO, whose provisions envisaged the adoption of resolution 1244 (1999), and which confirmed and guaranteed the partial sovereignty and full territorial integrity of Serbia, did not prevent many Western countries from unilateral recognition of the independence of so-called Kosovo and from once again violating the territorial integrity of our country, the Charter of the United Nations and resolution 1244 (1999). Owing precisely to such developments, which Serbia experienced and continues to experience, I am convinced that I am fully entitled to quote in this Hall the words of the great Martin Luther King: “Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere.” Those words are carved like a reminder, but also as a warning to all of us.
Regardless of the fact that we still feel the consequences of the gross violation of the basic provisions of international public law, we do not give up on the United Nations founding principles. We will continue to advocate consistent observance of the principle of the inviolability of borders and respect for the sovereignty and integrity of all other States Members of the United Nations. Despite that position of ours, many in this Hall have issues with respecting the territorial integrity of Serbia. Participants wonder why? Because they have power in their hands and, in their eyes, we are small and weak. However, as those present can hear and see, we have the strength to tell the truth, even here.
We owe special gratitude to all those States Members of the United Nations — and they currently constitute a majority at this Assembly — that support the territorial integrity of the Republic of Serbia, particularly in the space and territory of Kosovo and
Metohija. In addition, it is encouraging that the number of countries that support Serbia’s position increased in the period between the two sessions, which is a trend that must continue because it is of the utmost importance to remain loyal to the basic principles embedded in the United Nations Charter, such as the principle of the inviolability of borders.
The Republic of Serbia, and I as its President, search very patiently and with a great deal of goodwill for compromise regarding Kosovo and Metohija under the auspices of the European Union and within the Belgrade-Pristina dialogue. It is a difficult process; it has lasted for more than 10 years, but we see no alternative to it. It is better to negotiate for 100 years than to wage war for a single day. I hope that we will reach a mutually acceptable solution, based on compromise, because that is absolutely the only way to reach our goal, which is long-lasting peace as a prerequisite for a prosperous life for Serbs and Albanians in an entire region. We have exhausted all other options and, speaking for Serbia at least, we do not even dream about going back to the path of conflict and bloodshed. The Balkan region could not stand another conflict. I rely on the goodwill and understanding of our international partners because they well know that some earlier decisions by their Governments were bad ones and that they were not acting in favour of the future of our region and world peace.
Belgrade is running that process under very complex circumstances, with elements of a hybrid war and a dirty campaign in part of the international community against our country in various areas. It is sufficient just to recall the quotes and allegations of the world media that Serbia would attack its neighbours and that Serbia was a threat to regional stability. Of course, that never happened, and it was only one among numerous lies against the Republic of Serbia. Serbia was featured as a potential destabilizing factor in the region only to be prevented from telling the truth — that the principle of the inviolability of borders must be equally applicable to all. Serbia was, and will be, a factor for stability in the entire region. Despite many untruths and falsehoods, Serbia supports the Dayton Peace Agreement, the territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the integrity of Republika Srpska within Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Meanwhile, we are convinced that the nations of the Balkans have the capacity to continue their lives in the future as friends and partners, with a common vision of membership of a united Europe. I know that well because we have already overcome many barriers that stood between our nations for years and that cost us thousands of lives and wasted futures. Serbia and Albania, for example, today have the closest and the friendliest relationship in the entire several-centuries- long common history in the area of the Balkan peninsula.
It took only clear-headed and pragmatic discussions about our future, not about our past, and talking about how to resolve the problems that were bothering our people, companies, workers, students and entrepreneurs. We discussed a great deal and by ourselves reached numerous solutions that have already removed barriers that existed between us for no rational reasons. First of all, in the economy, trade and flow of people and capital, for three years Serbia, Albania and North Macedonia have been implementing the Open Balkan initiative, which has a clear vision, namely, to open up the region for people, goods, services, capital and companies in order to create a space that would be permanently liberated from tensions and conflicts. In addition to the unquestionable common economic benefit that the initiative brings, it has a broader dimension, first of all in connecting people with different cultures and in promoting diversity, which clearly contributes to the general development of society in that part of Europe. In that way, Serbia actually continues to contribute to peace, stability and the reconciliation process in the region, whereby it certainly provides a significant contribution to global security.
We found the inspiration for the respective in the words of one of the greatest diplomats in history and a great Secretary-General, Dag Hammarskjold, that this Organization “was not created to take mankind into paradise, but rather to save humanity from hell”.
From the moment we curbed the global pandemic, we already faced new, unprecedented challenges for this century. While we, as humankind, take one step at a time in accelerated technological development, there are existential problems ahead of us, such as energy security and the financial safety of developing countries, but also distortions in the supply chains of basic food provisions. Solidarity, which was necessary in fighting the pandemic, is needed to a far greater extent today, when people’s basic needs for food and energy are endangered.
The Republic of Serbia thinks of its energy security as an inseparable part of its national security and as the
key prerequisite for the continuation of the economic development and progress of our country. We strive to provide the continuity of the energy supply, but we share the concern over the current geopolitical challenges that undermine energy stability in the world and in Europe. We remain committed to finding solutions with the transformational strength to attain regional and European energy safety. I would like to underline that the Republic of Serbia managed to preserve continuity in energy supply during the ongoing crisis. Nevertheless, we remain vitally interested in diversifying supply sources through additional investment in energy infrastructure, but also in the faster and more efficient development of capacities based on renewables.
It is precisely at the United Nations that we named the ongoing decade the decade of action — for transformation towards a more sustainable and resilient future. It must remain so, but at a slightly faster pace. Unequal development and financial perils in developing countries cause additional social layering and inevitably bring new antagonisms. Equal development must be neither limited nor conditioned geographically or politically; it must be provided to all people, regardless of ethnic, racial, cultural or religious affiliation.
There is another very important challenge ahead that we must overcome together — finding the most efficient way to mitigate the consequences of the current international crisis inflicted on global food supply security. Developments in that regard are highly alarming, and the reality is such that all of us, with no exceptions, are struck by them. The growing prices of food and its availability have become an additional problem. The task for all of us is to find operational and efficient solutions that will leave no one behind. It is up to us, States, as the most important international subjects, to participate individually in the coordination of measures, first of all, by contributing to this noble task at the national level in order to preserve what is most valuable — human lives and human dignity.
The topic of this year’s general debate alerts us to the importance of this moment and the relatedness of international challenges. The crises we are facing remind us of the importance of open communication. It does not take much wisdom to conclude that challenges can be successfully overcome only if their causes are properly identified. Serbia believes that it is imperative that current challenges not deepen world divisions in any way and that already obvious and intentional polarization at global levels should give way to principles of multilateralism.
I would like to underline that the Republic of Serbia stands ready to take part in collective efforts to reach the Sustainable Development Goals and to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Peace. Serbia shares the Secretary-General’s vision of a future of global cooperation, as envisaged by Our Common Agenda (A/75/982), and it strongly supports inclusive, networked and efficient multilateralism as the best tool for responding to the most urgent challenges for humankind.
Multilateralism, collective action and common responsibility are critical elements of our discussions thus far, but I would like to underline that the starting point for each such constructive engagement is solidarity.
Finally, I would like to reiterate that the Republic of Serbia will continue to be a reliable partner in achieving the common goals defined within the United Nations framework, led by the firm belief that it is the best path to forge a new world for us and generations to come. But we must not forget that the United Nations is as strong as our respect for the agreed decisions and documents of the Organization.
I would like to recall something that we have already heard uttered 23 times:
“The only standard we must follow is the Charter
of the United Nations.”
That is what we heard from everybody, but in the case of the Republic of Serbia, we saw that 17 of the 23 representatives speaking about the United Nations Charter and United Nations resolutions violated international law and did not follow the rules created and espoused by the United Nations. I hope that we will be able to overcome all of those difficulties and to apply the rules and procedures equally for everyone. Otherwise, I do not see the light at the end of the tunnel. Long live Serbia.