I would like to thank His Excellency Mr. Abdulla Shahid for his outstanding management of the work of the General Assembly at its previous session. I would also like to congratulate His Excellency Mr. Csaba Korosi on his assumption of the presidency of the Assembly at this session, and I wish him every success.
At the threshold of a new era for the world order, the United Arab Emirates has chosen to embrace peace, recovery and prosperity within an open global system based on a robust network of international relations providing new tracks for joint cooperation in the fields of economics, sustainable development, advanced technology and scientific research. That is the approach adopted by my country in the implementation of its foreign policy, which governs our bilateral relations and multilateral engagements in general and is guiding us throughout our current membership in the Security Council.
We are well aware, however, of the magnitude of the significant challenges before us today, as well as the increasing level of polarization that looms over the international system. That is the result of a growing number of crises and new conflict hotspots around the world, together with a dangerous escalation in the activities of armed groups while people around the world are suffering immensely from food and climate crises. Those challenges not only threaten the gains made by humankind, but they also have a severe impact on poor and developing countries and their ability to meet the needs of their peoples.
Such issues call into question the effectiveness of the current international order. However, it is that very system, which was built on the ruins of the Second World War, that has significantly contributed to strengthened international security and stability. What we need today is to restore confidence in the existing international
system and the legitimacy of its institutions through enhancing its efficiency and building its capabilities to address the current crises and overcome the existential challenges of the twenty-first century. The United Arab Emirates believes that, together, all the countries present in this Hall, with the requisite determination, can achieve those ends by combining our capabilities to chart a better future for our peoples. Accordingly, I would like to emphasize a number of issues that demand our attention in the coming period.
Recent developments underscore the need to respect international law, in particular, the United Nations Charter. That law must be applied consistently without double standards or selectivity, which is imperative for achieving stability and security in our international order — an order based on respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of States. In that context, we reiterate our demand for an end to Iran’s occupation of the three United Arab Emirates islands — Greater Tunb, Lesser Tunb and Abu Musa — whose United Arab Emirates sovereignty has been proven by history and international law. Despite the sincere calls of my country to peacefully resolve this conflict over the past five decades, we note that Iran has not responded. However, we will never relent in voicing our legitimate right over those islands, whether through direct negotiations or through the International Court of Justice.
We must spare no effort to overcome the fatigue that has become the most obvious characteristic of current international approaches to addressing crises. We need to find permanent, comprehensive and fair solutions to the escalating armed conflicts around the world and to address the repercussions of turmoil on the international scene. Therefore, the next stage requires us to adopt innovative solutions in order to enhance the effectiveness of our international system and enable countries and regions with conflicts to play a constructive role in addressing the challenges of our era.
For decades, the Arab world and African continent have been hit hardest by crises. As a direct result, we have learned difficult yet critical lessons. We must prioritize diplomatic solutions, dialogue and de-escalation in order to ease tensions, prevent new conflicts from emerging and combat extremist ideologies.
The recent positive developments in our region aimed at building bridges are prominent examples of overcoming previous differences and forging new partnerships based on cooperation in various fields and supporting critical sectors such as health, education and industry, as well as strengthening the role of women.
We stress our firm position on the establishment of an independent Palestinian State on the borders of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance with the agreed international terms of reference. We welcome the affirmation by the Prime Minister of the State of Israel in his statement from this rostrum regarding support for the vision of the two- State solution (see A/77/PV.8).
We also look forward to advancing all political processes in our region and paving pathways to peace. However, that should be complemented by strengthening the united international position that rejects interference in the internal affairs of Arab countries. That type of interference undermines conflict resolution, fuels extremism and terrorism and constitutes a flagrant violation of the sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity of States.
In the light of the increasing frequency of crises, it becomes imperative to enhance the role of regional and international organizations by holding consultations and providing them with the necessary tools, resources and expertise in order to enable them to effectively respond to current challenges. Regional organizations are more familiar with local contexts and better positioned to support mediation efforts. We have seen that repeatedly, including through the efforts of the African Union, whose initiatives we applaud and support.
As we all know, the maintenance of international peace and security requires a world free of weapons of mass destruction, particularly in the Middle East and the Korean peninsula. It also requires promoting dialogue to reduce tensions and to address regional and international concerns in that regard.
It is impossible to speak of a secure and stable international order in the absence of a firm international position rejecting terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and committed to holding the perpetrators and financers of terrorism accountable. Recently we have seen an increase in the flow of weapons and fighters of different backgrounds into conflict zones, in addition to the emergence of groups with high combat and military capabilities. Those fighters subsequently return to their countries of origin without having mechanisms to control them. In addition, the situation becomes increasingly dangerous owing to terrorists’ use of missiles and drones to launch cross-border attacks.
Those developments reflect the evolving nature of terrorism and require efforts to prevent conflict zones from becoming a safe haven for terrorists and to update and develop means of deterrence and adopt international rules and regulations that prevent terrorists from obtaining advanced weapons and technology. That threat manifested itself clearly in the Houthi terrorist group’s heinous and hostile attacks earlier this year against the capital of my country, Abu Dhabi, as well as against the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. At the same time, other terrorist groups, such as Da’esh, Al-Qaida, and Al-Shabaab, seek to develop their capabilities and reorganize their ranks, which directly threaten the gains made as a result of international cooperation in the war against terrorism.
As Governments, we must lead our people by example by establishing the values of tolerance and peaceful coexistence in the face of increasing attempts to spread hate speech around the world. In addition, and in the light of humankind’s shared destiny, it is imperative that we acknowledge the need for joint action. We must harness our shared capabilities and energy to implement comprehensive solutions and responses that rise to the level of the existential challenges that we face today and are not limited to a specific country or region.
There is no clearer example of that than the implications of climate change. People around the world are exposed to devastating floods, heat waves and drought, all of which exacerbate humanitarian crises and security threats, especially in areas most vulnerable to climate change. All those facts confirm that the fate of our planet is at stake. We must therefore forge partnerships, promote joint action and commit to supporting climate action by adopting the renewable energy agenda, providing adequate funding for climate action and supporting developing countries in building resilient communities.
It has become clear that investing in renewable energy means investing in the economy, international peace and security and future generations. In that regard, we must take advantage of available opportunities to create practical, rational and thoughtful solutions to the climate crisis, including during the twenty-seventh session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, to be held in the sisterly Arab Republic of Egypt in November. We urge all Member States to actively engage in that meeting. While my country prepares to host the twenty-eighth session next year, we are working to build partnerships, ensure inclusivity and focus on areas in which we can achieve meaningful results to address the phenomenon of climate change.
Furthermore, focusing on climate change will relieve the food crisis around the world. The Agricultural Innovation Mission for Climate, launched by the United Arab Emirates in cooperation with the United States, aims to improve food production and reduce hunger levels around the world. Simultaneously, we must intensify food assistance to all peoples and ensure the continued flow of global food supplies, while also looking for practical ways to secure supply chains in the light of the current geopolitical divisions.
Despite the gravity of the current challenges and the importance of addressing them, we must not disregard the need to ensure long-term stability and prosperity. In that regard, my country is building a diversified, knowledge-based economy that relies on scientific and technological progress as well as peaceful and secure communities. Two years after Abraham Accords, several initiatives took place this year to promote regional integration and strengthen cooperation in the development and economic fields across our region. We are witnessing today the rise of a community for progress in the Middle East, which will bolster joint cooperation with regard to the major global priorities.
In young people we see the best ability to mobilize such efforts, as demonstrated by their resilience and innovation in the face of the current crises, as well as their unparalleled passion to connect with their peers around the world and find sustainable solutions to global challenges. We will therefore not give up on the potential of young people or our investment in them to ensure that they remain pillars and leaders of the future. We also believe that the full, equal and meaningful participation of women in various fields contributes to advancing societies, thereby ensuring their stability now and in the future.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reiterates that it will continue its approach to humanitarian, diplomatic and development support for all peoples affected by crises and disasters, regardless of their religion, ethnicity, political affiliation or culture. We will continue to work with all friends and partners to build the capabilities and capacities of Governments and peoples across all fields for the universal common good. That approach remains the beacon of our efforts throughout all forums.