I have the great honour to convey the warm regards of His Majesty Sultan Haji Hassanal Bolkiah Mu’izzaddin Waddaulah, Sultan and Yang Di-Pertuan of Brunei Darussalam, to this year’s session of the General Assembly.
At the outset, I would like to congratulate His Excellency Mr. Csaba Korosi on assuming the presidency of the General Assembly at its seventy- seventh session. We also convey our deep appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Abdulla Shahid for his contribution and efforts in bringing multilateralism, which is an important and fundamental principle of our work at the United Nations, to the forefront during his presidency.
While it is good to be back in New York to deliver Brunei’s statement in person after a two-year absence, this year’s debate continues to take place amidst global uncertainties and challenges that test our individual and collective resilience.
It has been almost three years since we first heard of coronavirus disease (COVID-19), and whilst we are still feeling its effects, many of us are now looking towards a post-pandemic world. However, a key and crucial factor to achieving this would be a successful vaccination programme and by having vaccine equity. Let us not forget the mantra of the World Health Organization (WHO) that “No one is safe until everyone is safe”.
Unfortunately, as of June this year, only 58 out of 194 countries had achieved the 70 per cent complete vaccination target set by WHO, whilst the others have not. Although initial the challenges faced regarding the supply and manufacture of vaccines that resulted in delays have been addressed, we continue to see many countries still facing problems in getting their allocated vaccines.
While we recognize the role that the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility has played in this global health emergency, we also see the continued need to address the fundamental issue of vaccine inequity that has continued to impede supply and distribution. In this regard, we need to develop a more effective and more resilient global health infrastructure as part of our preparedness to face possible future global health emergencies.
More efforts are also needed to address the impact of the pandemic, especially on mental health, a condition that was often taken lightly even before the pandemic. This is important, as it can result in a huge economic burden on the countries concerned in the future. We in Brunei Darussalam have come to recognize the need to include this in our post-pandemic recovery efforts. As such, we have introduced a five-year Multisectoral Mental Health Action Plan. In addition, we are also working on a regional basis in East Asia in promoting better mental health and well-being.
Climate change is yet another challenge the world was facing even prior to the pandemic, and it is one that continues to be a real and existential threat today and that, if left unaddressed, could lead to another global emergency. In 2015, the world came together on two landmark agreements, namely, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, which sets a target to limit global warming by 1.5°C and global greenhouse-gas emissions; as well as the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which is aimed at, among other things, to achieve zero hunger. I believe that those two are interlinked and interconnected aspirations.
And yet, as we reach the halfway mark towards the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), we see the latest report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change showing that the impacts of climate change on agriculture have had devastating consequences on food production and food security. Furthermore, the recent report The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World 2022, issued by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, WHO and others, has shown that by 2030 the progress made in alleviating world hunger since 2015 will be nullified unless something drastic is done.
That is why we must hasten our efforts and remain steadfast in our commitments. To that end, Brunei Darussalam is committed to the climate ambition and is moving towards net zero by 2050, through forest preservation and transition to clean energy, to shape a low carbon and climate resilient future. With 72 per cent of our total land area still covered by rainforests, our greenhouse-gas emissions only accounts for 0.017 per cent that of global total.
As one of the regional champions for conservation, environment and forest preservation, Brunei is also playing a leading role regionally by hosting the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Centre for Climate Change. It will function as an intergovernmental centre for climate change coordination and cooperation. It will also strengthen the region’s capabilities to prevent, mitigate, and manage climate-related disasters through established mechanisms and the formulation of policies. We appreciate the contributions made thus far from our partners and friends in this initiative and continue to welcome others to come on board.
The United Nations is the foremost multilateral institution, and its Member States therefore have a responsibility to uphold international law and adhere to the founding principles of the Organization, specifically those respecting the sovereign equality and territorial integrity of all Members. The maintenance of international peace and security is of utmost importance, and that is no different in South-East Asia.
Last year, our region’s peace and stability were affected, and ASEAN collectively agreed on a five-point consensus to work gradually and constructively towards a peaceful solution and eventual return to normalcy in one of our fellow member States, namely, Myanmar. Unfortunately, matters continue to require close attention, and as such we appreciate the continued support and contributions of the United Nations and others in ASEAN’s efforts.
On a similar note, the current conflict in Europe has also raised global concern, leading Member States to unanimously adopt a resolution that ensures accountability of the Security Council. It is, however, disappointing that the same attention and regard have not been given to resolving other areas of conflict, particularly on the question of Palestine. We need to ensure that the same amount of attention and consideration are given to conflicts wherever they are, particularly where territorial integrity and sovereignty have been violated. Therefore, the international community must remain resolute in its commitment to safeguarding the two-State solution towards achieving an independent State of Palestine based on the pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
In conclusion, let me say that as we continue to address the concerns of the world in pre- and postcrisis terms, it is clear what this watershed moment in our collective history is. It should not deepen divisions among us. It should not entrench us in our differences, and it should not lead us to serve only ourselves. However, it should, in these final years of the SDGs, make us come together and uphold the spirit of multilateralism that will transform us into a better and more resilient United Nations.