I would like to warmly congratulate Mr. Csaba Korosi of Hungary on his election as President of the General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session. I also commend Secretary- General Antonio Guterres for his commitment to world peace and Mr. Abdulla Shahid of Maldives for the results that he achieved during his term.
Much has been said by the eminent speakers who have stood before me on this rostrum, which allows me to avoid certain repetition. The time has come for us to think of a global and lasting solution based on solidarity, sustainability and science, as the focus of this session calls on us to do. The solution to many of our problems is in joint reflection, global solidarity and the pursuit of concerted and collective actions. The coronavirus disease pandemic has tragically reminded us that we live in a globalized world, that the lives of all human beings have equal value, that humankind is one and that we have a shared destiny. We must share scientific knowledge and ensure equitable access to vaccines.
Over the past two years, we have been able to create greater political stability in our country, reaffirm our role on the African continent and reclaim our place in the concert of nations. However, the international context does not favour a full implementation of our development plan, particularly with respect to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. In Africa, we are also feeling the consequences of the war in Ukraine, whose impact is unfortunately broad, particularly in the energy and agricultural sectors. Inflation and increased prices for grains and other staples have considerably aggravated a food situation that was already challenging.
Guinea-Bissau is a coastal country with a great number of islands. We have dedicated much effort to mitigation and adaptation. We hope that the twenty- seventh Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change will be a deciding step in defining and adopting concrete strategies to minimize the negative impacts of climate change.
Allow me, as Chairman of the Authority of the Heads of State and Government of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), to recall that our subregion faces great security challenges and that we need peace in order to ensure the development and well-being of our people, who are our primary wealth. The stability of a large part of our continent in general, and of West Africa in particular, is threatened by the insecurity caused by terrorism, violent extremism and transnational crime, which violate the principles of the rule of law and democracy. ECOWAS created a political and legal framework and structural mechanisms to prevent and resolve political and institutional crises. However, the challenges continue to be numerous and difficult to overcome. We need international assistance to stop the advance of terrorism in West Africa and in the entire Sahel region. This is a threat to international peace and security, and, in order to combat it effectively, we must involve the entire international community, and the United Nations in particular.
I was recently chosen to chair the African Leaders Malaria Alliance. According to data from the World Health Organization, 96 per cent of malaria cases globally and 98 per cent of malaria deaths occur in Africa. Our continent has not achieved the established goal of reducing malaria incidence and mortality by 40 per cent by 2020, which would have been a fundamental step in eliminating malaria on the African continent by 2030. Therefore, we need more than ever to adopt appropriate measures to protect everyone, everywhere, from infectious diseases. I take this opportunity to call on all countries, Governments, donors and development partners to contribute to the replenishment of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. Together and in solidarity, we can end malaria once and for all and save millions of human lives.
Speaking of solidarity among States and peoples, we cannot forget to mention Cuba and the need for the United States embargo against our fellow nation to be lifted immediately.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that Guinea-Bissau, despite being a small country with limited means, will spare no effort to contribute to maintaining peace, stability and security on our planet. We are resolute in continuing to actively participate in the consolidation of multilateralism and the promotion of dialogue and cooperation among the nations and peoples of the world.